I am so proud to be standing here in front of you today – back in government…
…and not just any government – a majority Conservative Government.
To the people in this hall, I want to say thank you.
You are the greatest team a Prime Minister could ever have.
And to the British people:
When you put your cross in the Conservative box, you were putting your faith in us.
To finish the job we started. To back working people. To deliver security for you and your family.
And I’ll tell you now: we will not let you down.
But just for a moment, think back to May 7th.
I don’t know about you, but it only takes two words to make me smile. Exit poll.
And then what happened that night:
The Conservatives, winning across Wales; on the march in the Midlands.
Bolton West, Derby North, Berwick, Wells – Conservative once more…
…Gower for the first time ever.
The North, more Tory; the South, the East, almost a clean sweep…
…and Cornwall – that wonderful county – 100 per cent Conservative.
As dawn rose, a new light – a bluer light – fell across our isles.
And I will never forget that morning. Getting back to London. Seeing many of you. Then sitting down in the flat at No10 with Sam and the kids getting ready for school.
There we were, surrounded by half-packed boxes and bin bags. Well, you have to be ready for anything.
I was writing my speech and preparing to go and see Her Majesty. And I thought… I’ll just lie down and let it all sink in.
As I shut my eyes, Ed Balls had gone. And when I woke up and I switched on the radio, Nigel Farage had gone too.
There was a brief moment when I thought it was all a dream.
But there’s a serious point.
Why did all the pollsters and the pundits get it so wrong?
Because, fundamentally, they didn’t understand the people who make up our country.
The vast majority of people aren’t obsessives, arguing at the extremes of the debate.
Let me put it as simply as I can: Britain and Twitter are not the same thing.
The British people are decent, sensible, reasonable…
…and they just want a government that supports the vulnerable, backs those who do the right thing and helps them get on in life.
Good jobs; a decent home; better childcare; controlled immigration; lower taxes so there’s more money at the end of the month…
…an NHS that’s there for them, 7 days a week; great schools; dignity in retirement…
…that is what people want and that is what we will deliver.
The party of working people, the party for working people – today, tomorrow, always.
PARTY CHANGE
Ten years ago, I stood on a stage just like this one and said if we changed our party we could change our country.
We’ve done that – together.
I didn’t campaign on the NHS alone – you joined me.
It wasn’t just me who put social justice, equality for gay people, tackling climate change, and helping the world’s poorest at the centre of the Conservative Party’s mission – we all did.
And I didn’t select our candidates – it was you.
Look who was elected in May.
Nusrat Ghani, whose parents, just a generation ago, were living in a small village in Kashmir.
Seema Kennedy, who was five when she and her family were forced to flee revolutionary Iran.
Five years ago, Johnny Mercer was on his third tour of duty in Afghanistan. Caught in an ambush, he was left cradling a dear comrade as he lay fatally wounded.
Just days before the election, Scott Mann was doing his postal round in Cornwall – delivering not just his own campaign leaflets, but his rivals’ too.
Different journeys, often difficult journeys, all leading here.
So let us hear it for them now – the new generation of Conservative MPs.
Round the cabinet table, a third of my colleagues are women.
A few months ago, we were discussing childcare.
It was introduced by the Black British son of a single parent, Sam Gyimah.
He was backed up by the daughter of Gujarati immigrants who arrived in our country from East Africa with nothing except the clothes they stood up in, Priti Patel…
…and the first speaker was Sajid Javid, whose father came here from Pakistan to drive the buses.
This is what we’ve done together.
And now with couples married because of us…
…working people backed because of us…
…the NHS safe because of us…
…and children in the poorest parts of the world saved because of us…
…everyone in this hall can be incredibly proud of our journey – the journey of the modern, compassionate, One Nation Conservative Party.
GREATER BRITAIN
So as five years of government stretch out before us, what do I see on the skyline?
I love Britain. I love our history and what we’ve given to the world.
I love our get-up-and-go; that whenever we’re down, we’re never out.
I love our character; our decency; our sense of humour.
I love every part of our country. England, Scotland, Wales, Northern Ireland – we are one nation and I will defend our Union with everything I have got.
Every day, in every way, Great Britain lives up to its name.
And I know this: we can make it greater still.
A Greater Britain. Where people have greater hope, greater chances, greater security.
I really believe we’re on the brink of something special in our country.
This year, we’ve seen more people in work than at any time in our history…
…more of our children starting university than ever before…
…more British entrepreneurs setting up shop than anywhere else in Europe.
Wages are rising. Hope is returning. We’re moving into the light.
But we’re not there yet.
We’re only half way through.
For me, that has a very literal meaning.
I can say something today that perhaps no Prime Minister has ever really been able to say before.
I’m starting the second half of my time in this job.
As you know, I am not going to fight another election as your leader. So I don’t have the luxury of unlimited time.
Let me tell you: I am in just as much of a hurry as five years ago.
Securing our country, growing our economy; jobs, exports, growth, infrastructure…
…these are the stepping stones on the path to greatness for our country – and we’ve been laying them every day since we came to office.
We will continue to do so.
But to make Britain greater, we need to tackle some deep social problems…
…problems we only just made a start on, as we focused on the economic emergency that faced us.
The scourge of poverty.
The brick wall of blocked opportunity.
The shadow of extremism – hanging over every single one of us.
A Greater Britain doesn’t just need a stronger economy – it needs a stronger society.
And delivering this social reform is entirely fitting with the great history of the Conservative Party…
…who have always been the optimists, the agents of hope and the leaders of change.
That’s why I joined it.
That’s why I wanted to lead it.
And now, in my final term as Prime Minister, I say: let’s live up to the greatest traditions of Conservative social reform.
CONSERVATIVE VALUES
In all the challenges we face, we will be guided by our Conservative values.
Our belief in strong defence and sound money.
Our belief in an enterprise economy…
…that if you set free the ambition that burns so deeply within the British people, they will strike out on their own, take on new workers, take on the world.
Our belief in equality of opportunity, as opposed to equality of outcome…
…not everyone ending up with the same exam results, the same salary, the same house – but everyone having the same shot at them.
Now some people may argue these things are obvious.
I have to tell you, they’re not.
It becomes clearer by the day that the Labour Party has completely abandoned any notion of these ideas.
So let us resolve here, at this conference, to do what we’ve always done: to prove our Conservative truths…
…to save Britain from the danger of Labour…
…and to rebuild Britain so it is greater still.
A Greater Britain – that is our goal.
NATIONAL SECURITY
It begins by making the case for strong defence.
My first duty as Prime Minister is to keep people safe.
Some of the loneliest moments in this job are when you are reading intelligence reports about plots being planned against the British people.
This summer I was told that Reyaad Khan and Junaid Hussain were in Syria planning terrorist attacks on UK soil.
Of course, I asked all the proper questions.
How do we stop them? Is there another way? Do we have that capability? Is it legal?
I knew that whatever action I took would provoke a big debate.
But my job as Prime Minister is quite simple, really: ultimately, it’s not to debate; it’s to decide.
And the choice I faced was this:
Act – and we could stop them carrying out their plans.
Stall – and we could see innocent people murdered on our streets.
So I took decisive action to keep Britain safe – and that’s what I will always do.
LABOUR LEADER
And on the subject of protecting our country from terrorism, let me just say this:
Thousands of words have been written about the new Labour leader.
But you only really need to know one thing: he thinks the death of Osama bin Laden was a “tragedy”.
No.
A tragedy is nearly 3,000 people murdered one morning in New York.
A tragedy is the mums and dads who never came home from work that day.
A tragedy is people jumping from the towers after the planes hit.
My friends – we cannot let that man inflict his security-threatening, terrorist-sympathising, Britain-hating ideology on the country we love.
MIGRATION
Another big judgment call to make is when a refugee crisis confronts our world.
Like most people, I found it impossible to get the image of that poor Syrian boy Aylan Kurdi out of my mind.
We know in our hearts our responsibilities to help those fleeing for their lives.
But we know, too, that we must keep our heads.
Let’s start with a simple fact.
Twelve million people have been made homeless by the conflict in Syria. And so far only 4 per cent of them have come to Europe.
If we opened the door to every refugee, our country would be overwhelmed.
The best thing Britain can do is help neighbouring countries, the Syrian people and the refugees in the camps …
…and when we do take refugees, to take them from the region, rather than acting in a way that encourages more to make that dangerous journey.
As we do this, let’s remember: we haven’t only just started caring about Syrians.
We’ve been helping them over the past four years, giving more in aid to that part of the world than any other country except America.
And we have been able to do that because this party made a promise and kept a promise – to spend 0.7 per cent of our national income on aid.
Other countries also made that promise. But they didn’t keep it.
I say to them: if Britain can keep her promises, so should you.
But the real answer to the refugee crisis lies in helping countries like Syria become places where people actually want to live.
That means having a government that’s not terrorising its people – and that’s why Assad must go.
In its place, we need a government that can be our ally in the defeat of ISIL…
…because we will never be safe here in Britain until we eradicate that death cult.
Some think we can contract that out to America. We shouldn’t. We must play our part too.
And we can, because of that commitment we made this summer: yes, we will spend two per cent of our GDP on defence – this year, next year, throughout this decade.
In the coming years, we’ll be launching the biggest aircraft carriers in our history…
…a new class of Hunter Killer submarines…
…new Joint Strike Fighter jets; improved Apache helicopters; a new fleet of drones…
…and because our independent nuclear deterrent is our ultimate insurance policy – this Government will order four new trident submarines.
In government, I have a team who keep us safe at home and abroad…
…Justine Greening, Michael Fallon, Philip Hammond and Theresa May.
But above all, we have Britain’s Armed Forces.
Let me tell you this:
In the last year alone they tackled Ebola in West Africa; protected the skies over the Baltic; flew missions over Iraq.
They built defences against ISIL in Lebanon; trained army officers in Afghanistan; and patrolled the seas around the Falklands.
There they were, in the Pacific, flying supplies to cyclone victims; in the Atlantic, shipping assistance to those hit by hurricanes; in the Med, pulling people out of sinking dinghies.
Little England? No. Never.
Great Britain. And I’ll tell you what, with Armed Forces like this, we can be even greater still.
So let’s stand and thank them for everything they do to keep us safe.
EUROPE
A Greater Britain is one that is strong in the world – and that should mean one that is strong in Europe, too.
It comes back to those Conservative values: our belief in the nation state, but also in free trade.
We all know what’s wrong with the EU – it’s got too big, too bossy, too interfering.
But we also know what’s right about it – it’s the biggest single market in the world.
Now, some people say: “take what we’ve got and put up with it”.
Others say: “just walk away from the whole thing”.
I say: no. This is Britain. We don’t duck fights. We get stuck in. We fix problems.
That’s how we kept our border checkpoints when others decided to take theirs down.
It’s how we kept the pound when others went head first into the Euro.
Because we do things our way.
We get rebates. We get out of bailouts.
But do you know what? It’s not just what we get out of, it’s what we get Europe into.
Who do you think got Europe to open trade talks with America, which would be the biggest trade deal in our history?
Who do you think got Europe to agree to sanctions on Iran, which brought that country to the negotiating table?
Us. Britain. We did.
Believe me, I have no romantic attachment to the European Union and its institutions.
I’m only interested in two things: Britain’s prosperity and Britain’s influence.
That’s why I’m going to fight hard in this renegotiation – so we can get a better deal and the best of both worlds.
Let me give you one example.
When we joined the European Union we were told that it was about going into a common market, rather than the goal that some had for “ever closer union”.
Let me put this very clearly: Britain is not interested in “ever closer union” – and I will put that right.
ECONOMIC SECURITY
A Greater Britain needs a dynamic economy.
Today, it’s a beacon in an uncertain world…
…we’ve got more foreign investment flooding into our country than anywhere else in Europe – anywhere in the world except for America and China.
But if anyone thinks the battle on the economy is won, they need to think again. The battle has only just begun.
We still need to find savings and produce more; still need to become more competitive; still need to make the most of our entire country – and build the Northern Powerhouse.
And all at a time when our opponents have given up any sensible, reasonable, rational arguments on the economy.
We live in a country where the main opposition party – let’s not forget, the alternative government – believes in nationalising industries without compensation, jacking up taxes to 60 per cent of people’s income, and printing money.
There’s an academic called Richard Murphy. He’s the Labour Party’s new economics guru, and the man behind their plan to print more money.
He gave an interview a few weeks ago. He was very frank. He admitted that Labour’s plan would cause a “sterling crisis”, but to be fair…
…he did add, and I quote, that it “would pass very quickly”.
Well, that’s alright then.
His book is actually called “The Joy of Tax”. I’ve read it. It’s got 64 positions – and they’re all wrong.
This is actually serious.
I tell you: our party’s success in growing our economy and winning the economic arguments has never been more vital.
Nothing less than the security of every single family in our country depends on it.
And as we do that, I know that we will have on our side not just the British people, not just British business…
…but our Iron Chancellor, George Osborne.
You know what makes me most angry about Labour?
It’s not just that their arguments are wrong; it’s the self-righteous way they make them.
The deficit-deniers, who go around saying we’re hurting the poor.
Hang on a second.
Who gets hurt when governments lose control of spending and interest rates go through the roof?
Who gets hurt when you waste money on debt interest and have to cut the NHS?
Who gets hurt when taxes go up and businesses start firing rather than hiring?
No – not the rich…
…it’s poor people, working people.
Yes, the very people Labour claim to be for.
Well let’s just remember: Labour ideas don’t help the poor, they hurt the poor.
That’s right, Labour: you’re not for working people, but hurting people.
If you want a lecture about poverty, ask Labour.
If you want something done about it, come to us, the Conservatives.
There’s another argument we need to win.
There are some people who understand the deficit needs to come down, but don’t get why we need a surplus.
I’ll tell you why.
I don’t stand here like a former Prime Minister once did and say I have abolished boom and bust.
We can’t just be thinking about today, we should be thinking about the rainy days that could come – just like a family does.
They put something aside, take out the insurance plan, pay off some of the mortgage when they have something spare.
That’s what we should do as a country – making sure we are ready to cope with future crises.
There’s a word for those who say live for today, forget about tomorrow: it’s selfish.
I’m not here to mortgage our children’s future. I’m here to insure it.
HOME OWNERSHIP
But for me, there’s one big piece of unfinished business in our economy: housing.
A Greater Britain must mean more families owning a home of their own.
It goes back to those Conservative beliefs: reward for hard work.
If you’ve worked hard and saved, I don’t want you just to have a roof over your head – I want you to have a roof of your own.
In the last 5 years, 600,000 new homes have been built.
More than 150 people a day are moving in thanks to our Help to Buy scheme.
And in our manifesto, we announced a breakthrough policy: extending the Right to Buy to housing association tenants.
Some people said this would be impossible. Housing associations would never stand for it. The legislation would never pass.
Let me tell you something.
Greg Clark, our brilliant Communities Secretary, has secured a deal with housing associations to give their tenants the Right to Buy their home.
That will mean the first tenants can start to buy their homes from next year.
Yes, as we said in our manifesto, 1.3 million to be given the chance to become homeowners. A promise made. A promise kept.
But the challenge is far, far bigger.
When a generation of hardworking men and women in their 20s and 30s are waking up each morning in their childhood bedrooms – that should be a wakeup call for us.
We need a national crusade to get homes built.
That means banks lending, government releasing land, and yes – planning being reformed.
And in all these things I’ll be working with a great London Mayoral candidate – and, I hope, soon to be our London Mayor – Zac Goldsmith.
But I want to single someone out. He’s served this country. He’s served this party. And there’s a huge amount more to come.
So let’s hear it for the man who for two terms has been Mayor of the greatest capital city on earth: Boris Johnson.
Increasing home ownership means something else.
For years, politicians have been talking about building what they call “affordable homes” – but the phrase was deceptive.
It basically meant homes that were only available to rent. What people want are homes they can actually own.
After all, the officials who prepare the plans for the new homes, the developers who build them, the politicians who talk about them…
…most of these people own the homes they live in.
Don’t they realise other people want what they’ve got – a home of their own?
So today, I can announce a dramatic shift in housing policy in our country.
Those old rules which said to developers: you can build on this site, but only if you build affordable homes for rent…
…we’re replacing them with new rules…
…you can build here, and those affordable homes can be available to buy.
Yes, from Generation Rent to Generation Buy…
…our party, the Conservative party…
…the party of home ownership in Britain today.
SOCIAL REFORM
A more prosperous Britain.
But we must not stop there as we build a Greater Britain.
We are not a one-trick party.
For us, economic success – that’s not the finished article.
It’s the foundation on which we can build a better society.
Our patriotism has never been simply some grand notion of ruling the waves, or riding high in the money markets…
…but a deep compulsion which says: “you make a country greater by making life better for its people.”
And today, that means entering those no-go zones, where politicians often don’t dare to venture.
It means taking on our big social problems…
…entrenched poverty, blocked opportunity, the extremism that blights our communities.
Why?
So when the new mum looks at her new-born baby – the most precious thing she’s ever seen – and she vows to provide for it, she knows she actually can.
When the schoolgirl sits in that classroom, she knows that her studies really can take her to the very top.
When the child of immigrants sees our flag, he feels so loyal to this country – his country – he wants to put on a uniform and defend it.
That is what fires me up. Not pounds and pence, plans and policies, but people.
And to those who say: our social problems are too big and there’s no way you can sort them out.
I say: You said our party wouldn’t change – we have.
You said our long-term economic plan wouldn’t work – it is.
You said we wouldn’t win the election – we did.
So we are going to tackle those big social problems – just you watch us.
POVERTY
Central to that is an all-out assault on poverty.
Conservatives understand that if we’re serious about solving the problem, we need to tackle the root causes of poverty.
Homes where no-one works; children growing up in chaos; addiction, mental health problems, abuse, family breakdown.
Today, a teenager sitting their GCSEs is more likely to own a smartphone than have a dad living with them.
Think of your own child, think of the day they were born; how fragile they were…
…and then think that, every day, three babies are born in Britain addicted to heroin.
We’ll never deal with poverty unless we get to grips with these issues.
We made a start in the last five years with our Troubled Families programme.
It’s already turned around the lives of over 100,000 families.
And do you know one of its central aims?
It’s simple: get the adults a job.
Because we know in this party that the best route out of poverty is work.
That’s why we reformed welfare, introduced the cap and helped create 2.5 million jobs.
But it’s not enough simply to have a job: work has got to pay.
Nearly two-thirds of children in poverty have parents who are in jobs. For them, work hasn’t worked.
That’s why we’ve cut taxes for the lowest paid and we’ll keep on doing that.
And from next year, we’ll take a giant leap forward.
Yes, a new National Living Wage.
Over £9 an hour by the end of the decade.
An £80-a-week pay rise for the lowest paid.
Work paying for millions of people.
So let the message go out: if you work hard, want to get on, want more money at the end of the month…
…the party for you is right here in this hall.
But being out of work is only one of the causes we must tackle.
Children in care are today almost guaranteed to live in poverty.
84 per cent leave school without five good GCSEs.
70 per cent of prostitutes were once in care.
And tragically, care leavers are four times more likely to commit suicide than anyone else.
These children are in our care; we, the state, are their parents – and what are we setting them up for…
…the dole, the streets, an early grave?
I tell you: this shames our country and we will put it right.
Just as we said to failing schools, “do a better job with our children or we will send new leaders in”, so we will say to poorly performing social services, “improve or be taken over”.
Just as we got the best graduates teaching at our most difficult schools, let’s get our brightest and best to the frontline of social work.
But we must also stop children needing to be in care at all.
When we came to office, the adoption rate in our country was frankly a scandal.
It has gone up. Our Adoption Bill will help it increase still further.
But there’s so much more to do.
So let us in this hall say to all those children desperate for a family, and all those families yearning for a child:
We, the Conservatives, we are the ones who will bring you together.
There’s another service run by the state that all too often fails and entrenches poverty.
Prison.
Now I believe if you’ve committed a crime, punishment must follow.
And when it’s serious enough, that punishment must mean prison.
Let’s not forget, since we came to office, crime is down by a quarter.
But the system is still not working.
Half of criminals offend within a year of being released.
Nearly half go into prison with no qualifications; many come out with none either.
And all the problems that may have led them to that life – drug addiction, mental health problems, childhood abuse – remain unchanged.
We have got to get away from the sterile lock-em-up or let-em-out debate, and get smart about this.
When prisoners are in jail, we have their full attention for months at a time – so let’s treat their problems, educate them, put them to work.
When we restrict someone’s freedom outside prison, we can make sure they’re working and paying taxes, rather than spending £30,000 a year keeping them in a cell – so where it makes sense, let’s use electronic tags to help keep us safe and help people go clean.
And when our prisons are relics from the time of Dickens – it’s time to sell them off and build new ones that actually work.
This is going to be a big area of social reform in the next five years. And I have just the man for the job.
The man who takes on every vested interest and gives everyone a chance…
…the man who began the great transformation of our education system and is now going to do the same for prisons…
…yes, the great Conservative reformer, Michael Gove.
OPPORTUNITY
If we tackle the causes of poverty, we can make our country greater.
But there’s another big social problem we need to fix.
In politicians’ speak: a “lack of social mobility”.
In normal language: people unable to rise from the bottom to the top, or even from the middle to the top, because of their background.
Listen to this: Britain has the lowest social mobility in the developed world.
Here, the salary you earn is more linked to what your father got paid than in any other major country.
I’m sorry, for us Conservatives, the party of aspiration, we cannot accept that.
We know that education is the springboard to opportunity.
Our reforms are already working.
More children studying maths and science. More learning coding and engineering. More doing the extra-curricular activities that teach confidence and build character.
Recently, I was at a school in Runcorn. Last year, 53 of their children went off to university. 52 of them were the first ever in their family to do so.
That is why I’m so passionate about academies and free schools:
Head teachers are growing in confidence as they throw off the shackles of local council control…
…raising the aspirations of children, parents, communities.
This movement is sweeping across our country.
So my next ambition is this.
500 new Free Schools.
Every school an academy…
…and yes – Local Authorities running schools a thing of the past.
But let’s be honest.
For too many people, even a good education isn’t enough.
There are other barriers that stand in their way.
Picture this.
You’ve graduated with a good degree.
You send out your CV far and wide.
But you get rejection after rejection.
What’s wrong? It’s not the qualifications or the previous experience.
It’s just two words at the top: first name, surname.
Do you know that in our country today: even if they have exactly the same qualifications, people with white-sounding names are nearly twice as likely to get call backs for jobs than people with ethnic-sounding names?
This is a true story.
One young black girl had to change her name to Elizabeth before she got any calls to interviews.
That, in 21st century Britain, is disgraceful.
We can talk all we want about opportunity, but it’s meaningless unless people are really judged equally.
Think about it like this.
Opportunity doesn’t mean much to a British Muslim if he walks down the street and is abused for his faith.
Opportunity doesn’t mean much to a black person constantly stopped and searched by the police because of the colour of their skin.
Opportunity doesn’t mean much to a gay person rejected for a job because of the person they love.
It doesn’t mean much to a disabled person prevented from doing what they’re good at because of who they are.
I’m a dad of two daughters – opportunity won’t mean anything to them if they grow up in a country where they get paid less because of their gender rather than how good they are at their work.
The point is this: you can’t have true opportunity without real equality.
And I want our party to get this right.
Yes us, the party of the fair chance; the party of the equal shot…
…the party that doesn’t care where you come from, but only where you’re going…
…us, the Conservatives, I want us to end discrimination and finish the fight for real equality in our country today.
EXTREMISM
Tackling the causes of poverty. Fighting for real opportunity.
And there’s one more big social reform in our mission to rebuild Britain as an even greater country.
We need to confront – and I mean really confront – extremism.
When I read what some young people born and brought up in this country are doing, it makes me feel sick to my stomach.
Girls not much older than my eldest daughter, swapping loving family homes and straight-A futures for a life of servitude under ISIL, in a land of violence and oppression.
Boys who could do anything they wanted in Britain – who have benefitted from all this country stands for – instead ending up in the desert wielding a knife.
This ideology, this diseased view of the world, has become an epidemic – infecting minds from the mosques of Mogadishu to the bedrooms of Birmingham.
And here’s what we need to do.
One: tear up the narrative that says Muslims are persecuted and the West deserves what it gets.
Never mind that it’s Britain and America behind the biggest effort to help the victims of Syria.
Who is ISIL murdering more than anyone else? Muslims.
No-one should get away with this politics of grievance anymore.
Two: take on extremism in all its forms, the violent and non-violent.
People don’t become terrorists from a standing start.
It begins with preachers telling them that Christians and Muslims can’t live together.
It moves to people in their community saying the security services were responsible for 7/7.
It progresses to a website telling them how to wage jihad, fight in Syria, and defeat the West.
And before you know it, a young British boy, barely 17, is strapping bombs to his body and blowing himself up in Iraq.
We have to stop it at the start – stop this seed of hatred even being planted in people’s minds, let alone allowing it to grow.
Three: we need to tackle segregation.
There are parts of Britain today where you can get by without ever speaking English or meeting anyone from another culture.
Zoom in and you’ll see some institutions that actually help incubate these divisions.
Did you know, in our country, there are some children who spend several hours each day at a Madrassa?
Let me be clear: there is nothing wrong with children learning about their faith, whether it’s at Madrassas, Sunday Schools or Jewish Yeshivas.
But in some Madrassas we’ve got children being taught that they shouldn’t mix with people of other religions; being beaten; swallowing conspiracy theories about Jewish people.
These children should be having their minds opened, their horizons broadened…
…not having their heads filled with poison and their hearts filled with hate.
So I can announce this today:
If an institution is teaching children intensively, then whatever its religion, we will, like any other school, make it register so it can be inspected.
And be in no doubt: if you are teaching intolerance, we will shut you down.
This goes to a wider truth.
For too long, we’ve been so frightened of causing offence that we haven’t looked hard enough at what is going on in our communities.
This is passive tolerance. And I’ll tell you where it leads:
To children, British children, going to Pakistan in the summer holidays, before they’ve even started their GCSEs, and forced to marry a man they’ve never met…
…children, British children, having their genitals mutilated, not just in a clinic in Lagos but the backstreets in Britain.
This passive tolerance has turned us into a less integrated country; it’s put our children in danger. It is unforgiveable.
So let me say it right here: no more passive tolerance in Britain.
We’ve passed the laws – now I want them enforced.
People who organise forced marriages – I want them prosecuted.
Parents who take their children for FGM – I want them arrested.
And as we do that, we shouldn’t just be saying what’s wrong with these practices; we should be saying what’s right with Britain.
Freedom. Democracy. Equality. These are precious.
People fought for them – many died for them…
…in the trenches, a century ago; on the beaches, 30 years later…
…in the Suffragettes; in Gay Pride.
Half the world is crying out for these freedoms – they see what we’ve achieved with them.
Free speech – and the best literature in the world.
Freedom of religion – and many faiths living side by side, peacefully.
Free thinking – and the endless advances in medicine and technology that has brought.
A free economy – and a standard of living our grandparents could only have dreamed of.
I want my children – I want all our children – to know they’re part of something big – the proudest multi-racial democracy on earth.
That’s why we’re making sure they learn British history at school.
That’s why we started National Citizen Service to bring different people together.
I want them to grow up proud of our country.
That’s right: less Britain-bashing, more national pride – our way, the Conservative way, the only way to greater days.
CONSERVATIVES
So big battles. Big arguments. A Greater Britain.
Keeping our head as Labour lose theirs.
So I have a message for those who voted for us and those who never have:
If you believe in strong defence, and helping the poorest, most desperate people in the world.
If you want an NHS that’s there for everybody, and schools that stretch our children…
…and you understand none of that is possible without a strong economy.
If you believe we can become the enterprise capital of the world and beat poverty.
If you believe that the fight against extremism is the fight for our existence; and you want this to be the generation that ends discrimination.
If you want these things, the party you need is the party right here.
And it’s never too late.
Bernard Harris from Leicester wrote to me before polling day and said this.
“Aged 82, this is possibly my last election.
“In my life I have foolishly voted Labour, believing it served the working class.
“How wrong I was. Labour is against all I aspire to.
“I am 100 per cent for a United Kingdom, a sound economy, free enterprise, a trading Europe and a decent standard of living.
“Only a Conservative Government will achieve this.”
Bernard, you found the right party – and I want many more to follow in your footsteps.
CONCLUSION
So I believe that we can make this era – these 2010s – a defining decade for our country…
…the turnaround decade…
…one which people will look back on and say: “that’s the time when the tide turned…
…when people no longer felt the current going against them, but working with them.”
We can be that Greater Britain.
Because we know this: nothing is written.
We’ve proved it in schools across our country…
…that the poorest children don’t have to get the worst results – they can get the best.
Over the next five years we will show that the deep problems in our society – they are not inevitable.
That a childhood in care doesn’t have to mean a life of struggle.
That a stint in prison doesn’t mean you’ll get out and do the same thing all over again.
That being black, or Asian, or female, or gay doesn’t mean you’ll be treated differently.
Nothing is written.
And if we’re to be the global success story of the 21st century, we need to write millions of individual success stories.
A Greater Britain – made of greater expectations…
…where renters become homeowners…
…employees become employers…
…a small island becomes an even bigger economy…
…and where extremism is defeated once and for all.
A Greater Britain…
…no more, its people dragged down or held back…
…no more, some children with their noses pressed to the window as they watch the world moving ahead without them.
No – a country raising its sights, its people reaching new heights…
…a Great British take-off – that leaves no-one behind.
That’s our dream – to help you realise your dreams.
A Greater Britain – made of greater hope, greater chances, greater security.
So let’s get out there – all of us – and let’s make it happen.

Almost 3 years ago, I made a speech about Europe.
I argued that the European Union needed to reform if it was to meet the challenges of the twenty-first century.
I argued that Britain’s best future lay within a reformed European Union, if the necessary changes could be agreed.
And I promised the British people that, if I was re-elected as Prime Minister, we would have an in-out referendum…
…and the final say on whether our national and economic security is better protected by remaining in the European Union, or by leaving.
That promise is now being honoured.
The law of the land will require that there must be a referendum on our EU membership by the end of 2017.
The re-negotiation is now entering its formal phase, following several rounds of technical discussions.
Today I am writing to the President of the European Council setting out how I want to address the concerns of the British people…
…and why I believe that the changes that Britain is seeking will benefit not just Britain, but the EU as a whole.
That will of course be for the negotiation itself to conclude the precise legal changes needed to bring about the reforms Britain needs.
But today I want to explain in more detail why we want to make the changes we have set out – and how they will make a difference.
This is perhaps the most important decision the British people will have to take at the ballot box in our lifetimes.
So I want to set out for the British people why this referendum matters, and some of the issues we should weigh up very carefully as the arguments ebb and flow as we approach the referendum.
And I want to explain to our European partners why we are holding this referendum…
…what we are asking for and why.
Bloomberg – still valid 3 years on
Since I made that speech almost 3 years ago, the challenges facing the European Union have not diminished – indeed they have grown.
The economic outlook may be somewhat brighter. But the legacy of the Eurozone crisis endures.
The threats to our security – and to the security of every European nation – have grown enormously in the last few years…
… from the Russian invasion of Eastern Ukraine, to the emergence of ISIL, and the migration flows triggered by the war in Syria.
And across Europe, the rise of parties of protest demands a response.
But nothing that has happened – nothing – has undermined or rendered obsolete the central argument I set out in my speech at Bloomberg.
If anything it has reinforced it.
The European Union needs to change.
It needs to become more competitive to cope with the rise of economies like China and India.
It needs to put relations between the countries inside the Euro and those outside it – like Britain – onto a stable, long-term basis.
It needs greater democratic accountability to national parliaments.
Above all, it needs, as I said at Bloomberg, to operate with the flexibility of a network, not the rigidity of a bloc.
Never forget that the European Union now comprises 28 ancient nations of Europe.
That very diversity is Europe’s greatest strength.
Britain says let’s celebrate that fact.
Let’s acknowledge that the answer to every problem is not always more Europe.
Sometimes it is less Europe.
Let’s accept that one size does not fit all.
That flexibility is what I believe is best for Britain; and, as it happens, best for Europe too.
Doing what is best for Britain drives everything I do as Prime Minister.
That means taking the difficult decisions, and sometimes making arguments that people don’t much want to hear.
It is why we have taken the difficult, but necessary action to reduce the deficit.
It is why we are seeing through our long-term economic plan.
It is why we are reforming welfare and education.
Because we know that the bedrock of our security is a strong economy – and that these are the things any nation must do to succeed in the twenty-first century.
It is also why, despite all the pressures on public finances, we have guaranteed to spend 2 percent of our economy on defence…
….and why we are spending 0.7 percent of our gross national income on overseas aid.
With that money we are able to equip our armed forces with 2 brand new aircraft carriers…
…double our fleet of drones…
…buy new fighter aircraft and new submarines…
…and invest in our special forces.
We are doing all of these things to protect our economic and national interest.
And that is the prism through which I approach our membership of the European Union.
Taking the tough decisions…
….making the difficult arguments…
…addressing the issues no one wants to talk about…
…and protecting and advancing our economic and national security.
Like most British people, I come to this question with a frame of mind that is practical, not emotional.
Head, not heart.
I know some of our European partners may find that disappointing about Britain.
But that is who we are.
That is how we have always been as a nation.
We are rigorously practical.
We are obstinately down to earth.
We are natural debunkers.
We see the European Union as a means to an end, not an end in itself.
“Europe where necessary, national where possible”, as our Dutch friends put it.
An instrument to amplify our nation’s power and prosperity – like NATO, like our membership of the UN Security Council or the IMF.
We understand that there is a close relationship between the security and prosperity of the continent to which our island is tied geographically…
…and our own security and prosperity.
In the week when we commemorate the end of the Great War…
…and in the year when we have marked the seventieth anniversary of the liberation of Europe, how could we not?
Britain has contributed in full measure to the freedom that Europe’s nations enjoy today.
Across the continent, from Ypres to Monte Cassino, from Bayeux to Arnhem,…
…in stone cold cemeteries lie the remains of British servicemen who crossed the Channel to help subjugated nations throw off the tyrant’s yoke…
…and return liberty to her rightful place on what Churchill called ‘this noble continent’.
And today, we continue to play our full role in European security and in global security.
Fighting Ebola in West Africa. Flying policing missions over the Baltic nations.
Contributing to NATO operations in Central and Eastern Europe.
Saving lives and busting the people smuggling rings in the Central Mediterranean.
Spending £1.1 billion on aid to the region of Syria, Lebanon and Jordan – more than any other European nation.
Britain has always been an engaged nation, because we know that engagement is the best way to protect and advance our economic and our national security.
So today, as we confront fresh threats and dangers to our country…
…I am in no doubt that for Britain the European question is not just a matter of economic security, but of national security too…
…not just a matter of jobs and trade, but of the safety and security of our nation.
Equally, when the European Union accounts for almost half of our trade…
…it matters for our economic security that the European Union is competitive and succeeds in promoting prosperity for its members.
Just as it matters to us that – while we are not part of the Euro – and, in my view never will be – the Eurozone is able to deal with its problems and succeed.
If it fails to do so, we will certainly not be immune from the side effects.
That is why, almost 3 years ago, I set out the case for reform – reform that would benefit Britain, and in my view benefit the entire EU.
I was clear that Britain gains advantages from her membership of the EU.
But I was also clear that there are some major problems which need to be addressed.
Political leadership means confronting these problems, not wishing them away.
If we ignore them, history teaches us that they will only get worse.
Let me explain what I mean.
4 major challenges facing the European Union
In my Bloomberg speech almost 3 years ago, I said that the European Union faced 3 major challenges.
First, the problems in the Eurozone: they need to be fixed – and that will require fundamental changes.
Second, a crisis of European competitiveness, as other nations across the world soar ahead and Europe risks being left behind.
And third, a gap between the EU and its citizens which has grown dramatically in recent years…
…and which represents a lack of democratic accountability and consent that is felt particularly acutely in Britain.
These 3 challenges are as critical now as they were when I first set them out.
And today I would add a fourth.
As we have seen so spectacularly across Europe with the questions posed by the migration crisis…
…countries need greater controls to manage the pressures of people coming in.
And while in Britain we are not part of the Schengen open borders agreement and so we have been able to set our own approach by taking refugees direct from the camps…
…we do need some additional measures to address wider abuses of the right to free movement within Europe…
…and to reduce the very high flow of people coming to Britain from all across Europe.
So the changes we are arguing for are substantial.
But they have a very clear purpose: to address these 4 key challenges which are vital to the success of the European Union…
…and to maintain and advance the UK’s economic and national security within it.
Let me explain each in
Economic governance and the Eurozone
First, it is in all our interests for the Eurozone to have the right governance and structures to secure a successful currency for the long-term.
Britain understands that, and we will not stand in the way of those developments, as long as we can be sure that there are mechanisms in place to ensure that our own interests are fully protected.
Let me explain what I mean.
Today there are 2 sorts of members of the European Union.
There are Euro members and there are non-Euro members.
The changes which the Eurozone will need to implement will have profound implications for both types of members.
So non-Euro members like Britain which are outside the Eurozone need certain safeguards…
….in order to protect the single market and our ability to decide its rules…
…and to ensure that we face neither discrimination nor additional costs from the integration of the Eurozone.
Because the European Union and the Eurozone are not the same thing.
And those of us who are in the EU but outside the Eurozone need that accepted.
We need a British model of membership that works for Britain and for any other non-Euro members.
And this should be perfectly possible.
The European Union is a family of democratic nations whose original foundation was – and remains – a common market.
There is no reason why the single currency and the single market should share the same boundary, any more than the single market and Schengen.
So the EU needs flexibility to accommodate both those inside and outside the Eurozone…
…both those who are contemplating much closer economic and political integration…
…and those countries like Britain which will never embrace that goal.
This is a matter of cardinal importance for the United Kingdom.
Because if the European Union were to evolve into a single currency club, where those outside the single currency are pushed aside and over-ruled, then it would no longer be a club for us.
We need this issue fixed – so that the UK is not obliged to fight a series of running battles which would only corrode trust among member states.
And we have to make sure that there is a point to being in the EU but not in the Eurozone, and that that position does not turn a country into a rule-taker instead of a rule-maker.
Now is the time to do that.
So as part of our renegotiation I am asking European leaders to agree clear and binding principles that protect Britain and other non-Euro countries…
…and a safeguard mechanism to ensure these principles are respected and enforced.
These principles should include the following. Recognition that the EU is a Union with more than one currency.
There should be no discrimination and no disadvantage for any business on the basis of the currency of their country.
The integrity of the single market must be protected.
As the Eurozone moves ahead, any changes it decides to make – like the creation of a banking union – must be voluntary for non-Euro countries, never compulsory.
Taxpayers in non-euro countries should never bear the cost for operations to support the Euro as a currency.
Just as financial stability and supervision has become a key area of competence for Eurozone institutions like the ECB…
…so financial stability and supervision is a key area of competence for national institutions like the Bank of England for non-Euro members.
And any issues that affect all member states must be discussed and decided by all member states.
Competitiveness
Second, we want a European Union that adds to our competitiveness, not detracts from it.
We have already made progress since my speech at Bloomberg.
Legislative proposals under the new Commission have fallen by 80 percent…
…with more regulations set to be repealed this year than in the whole of the previous Commission.
We have proposals for a Capital Markets Union which will help get finance into the hands of entrepreneurs and growing businesses.
The new plans to deepen the single market in services and digital will mean new opportunities for millions of British businesses to operate more easily anywhere in Europe.
Changes we secured just last month will mean that British tourists will no longer incur roaming charges when they use mobile phones…
…or have to pay extortionate credit card fees.
And just last month the European Commission published a new trade strategy that reflects the agenda that Britain has been championing for years…
…including pursuing massive trade deals with America, China, Japan and ASEAN.
We know the benefits free trade can bring.
Recent deals including one with Korea are already saving UK consumers £5 billion every year…
…and have helped UK car exports to Korea to increase five-fold.
But there is much more we can do.
For all we have achieved in stemming the flow of new regulations…
…the burden from existing regulation is still too high.
Two years ago we secured the first ever real terms cut in the EU budget.
It’s now time to do the same with EU regulation.
So we need a target to cut the total burden on business
And at the same time, we need to bring together all the different proposals, promises and agreements on the single market, on trade, and on cutting regulation…
…into one clear commitment that writes competitiveness into the DNA of the whole European Union.
Sovereignty and subsidiarity
Third, we need to deal with the disillusionment that many of Europe’s citizens feel towards the European Union as an institution.
These concerns are not just in Britain.
But they are perhaps greater here than anywhere else in the European Union today.
We have already passed a law to guarantee that no powers can transfer from Britain to Brussels ever again without the explicit consent of the British people in a referendum.
But if Britain is to remain in the EU, we need to do more.
And really it boils down to this.
We are a proud, independent nation.
We intend to stay that way.
So we need to be honest about this.
The commitment in the Treaty to an ever closer union is not a commitment that should apply any longer to Britain.
We do not believe in it.
We do not subscribe to it.
We have a different vision for Europe.
We believe in a flexible union of free member states who share treaties and institutions, working together in a spirit of co-operation…
…to advance our shared prosperity…
…and to protect our people from threats to our security whether they come from at home or abroad.
And continuing, in time and only with unanimous agreement, to welcome new countries into the EU.
This vision of flexibility and co-operation is not the same as those who want to build an ever closer political union – but it is just as valid.
And if we can’t persuade our European partners to share this vision for all…
…we certainly need to find a way to allow this vision to shape Britain’s membership.
So I can tell you today, that as part of our renegotiation…
…I am asking European leaders for a clear, legally binding and irreversible agreement to end Britain’s obligation to work towards an ever closer union.
That will mean that Britain can never be entangled in a political union against our will…
…or be drawn into any kind of United States of Europe.
We also need to ensure that – while the European Parliament plays an important role…
…there is a more significant role for national parliaments, including our own Parliament right here at Westminster.
It is national parliaments, which are, and will remain, the main source of real democratic legitimacy and accountability in the EU.
It is to the British Parliament that I must account on the EU budget negotiations, or on the safeguarding of our place in the single market.
Those are the parliaments which instil respect – even fear – into national leaders.
So it is time to give these national parliaments a greater say over EU law-making.
We are not suggesting a veto for every single national parliament.
We acknowledge that in a European Union of 28, that would mean gridlock.
But we want to see a new arrangement where groups of national parliaments can come together and reject European laws which are not in their national interest.
We also need to address the issue of subsidiarity – the question of what is best decided in Brussels and what is best dealt with in European capitals.
We believe that if powers don’t need to reside in Brussels, they should be returned to Westminster.
So we want to see the EU’s commitments to subsidiarity fully implemented, with clear proposals to achieve that.
In addition, the UK will need confirmation that the EU institutions will fully respect the purpose behind the justice and home affairs protocols in any future proposals dealing with justice and home affairs matters…
…in particular to preserve the UK’s ability to choose to participate.
In addition national security is – and must remain – the sole responsibility of member states…
…while recognising the benefits of working together on issues that affect the security of us all.
Finally, in this area, people are also frustrated by some legal judgments made in Europe that impact on life in Britain.
Of course, this relates as much to the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) as the European Union.
Which is why we need to act on both fronts.
So we will reform our relationship with the ECHR by scrapping Labour’s Human Rights Act and introducing a new British Bill of Rights.
We will – of course – consult on how to make this big constitutional change.
The consultation we will publish will set out our plan to remain consistent with the founding principles of the Convention,…
…whilst restoring the proper role of UK courts and our Parliament.
And as we reform the relationship between our courts and Strasbourg,…
…it is right that we also consider the role of the European Court of Justice (ECJ) and the Charter of Fundamental Rights.
So – as was agreed at the time of the Lisbon Treaty – we will enshrine in our domestic law that the EU Charter of Fundamental rights does not create any new rights.
We will make it explicit to our courts that they cannot use the EU Charter as the basis for any new legal challenge citing spurious new human rights grounds.
We will also examine whether we can go one step further.
We need to examine the way that Germany and other EU nations uphold their constitution and sovereignty.
For example, the Constitutional Court in Germany retains the right to review whether essential constitutional freedoms are respected when powers are transferred to Europe.
And it also reserves the right to review legal acts by European institutions and courts to check that they remain within the scope of the EU’s powers,…
…or whether they have overstepped the mark.
We will consider how this could be done in the UK.
Immigration
Fourth, we believe in an open economy. But we’ve got to be able to cope with all the pressures that free movement can bring – on our schools, our hospitals and our public services.
Right now the pressures are too great.
I appreciate that at a time when other European countries are facing huge pressure from migration from outside the EU, this may be hard for some other EU countries to understand.
But in a way these pressures are an example of exactly the point the UK has been making in recent years.
For us, it is not a question of race or background or ethnicity – Britain is one of the most open and cosmopolitan countries on the face of the earth.
People from all over the world can find a community of their own right here in Britain.
The issue is one of scale and speed, and the pressures on communities that brings, at a time when public finances are already under severe strain as a consequence of the financial crisis.
This was a matter of enormous concern in our recent General Election campaign and it remains so today.
Unlike some other member states, Britain’s population is already expanding.
Our population is set to reach over 70 million in the next decades and we are forecast to become the most populous country in the EU by 2050.
At the same time, our net migration is running at over 300,000 a year.
That is not sustainable.
We have taken lots of steps to control immigration from outside the EU.
But we need to be able to exert greater control on arrivals from inside the EU too.
The principle of the free movement of labour is a basic treaty right and it is a key part of the single market.
Over a million Brits benefit from their right to live and work anywhere in the EU.
We do not want to destroy that principle, which indeed many Brits take for granted.
But freedom of movement has never been an unqualified right, and we now need to allow it to operate on a more sustainable basis in the light of the experience of recent years.
Britain has always been an open, trading nation, and we do not want to change that.
But we do want to find arrangements to allow a member state like the UK to restore a sense of fairness to our immigration system…
…and to reduce the current very high level of migration from within the EU into the UK.
That means first of all correcting the mistakes of the past by ensuring that when new countries are admitted to the EU in the future…
…free movement will not apply to those new members until their economies have converged much more closely with existing member states.
Next, we need to create the toughest possible system for dealing with abuse of free movement.
That includes tougher and longer re-entry bans for fraudsters and people who collude in sham marriages.
It means addressing the fact that it is easier for an EU citizen to bring a non-EU spouse to Britain than it is for a British citizen to do the same.
It means stronger powers to deport criminals and stop them coming back, as well as preventing entry in the first place.
And it means addressing ECJ judgments that have widened the scope of free movement in a way that has made it more difficult to tackle this kind of abuse.
But ultimately, if we are going to reduce the numbers coming here we need action that gives greater control of migration from the EU.
As I have said previously, we can do this by reducing the draw that our welfare system can exert across Europe.
To those who say that this won’t make a difference. I say look at the figures.
We now know that, at any one time, around 40 percent of all recent European Economic Area migrants are supported by the UK benefits system…
…with each family claiming on average around £6,000 a year of in work benefits alone…
…and over 10,000 recently-arrived families claiming over £10,000 a year.
We need to restore a sense of fairness, and reduce this pull factor subsidised by the taxpayer.
So I promised 4 actions at the election.
Two have already been achieved.
EU migrants will not be able to claim Universal Credit while looking for work.
And if those coming from the EU haven’t found work within 6 months, they can be required to leave.
But we need to go further to reduce the numbers coming here.
So we have proposed that people coming to Britain from the EU must live here and contribute for 4 years before they qualify for in work benefits or social housing.
And that we should end the practice of sending child benefit overseas.
Now, I understand how difficult some of these welfare issues are for other Member States.
And I am open to different ways of dealing with this issue.
But we do need to secure arrangements that deliver on the objective set out in the Conservative Party manifesto to control migration from the European Union.
The 4 objectives
So these are the 4 objectives at the heart of our renegotiation.
Objective 1: protect the single market for Britain and others outside the Eurozone.
What I mean by that is a set of binding principles that guarantee fairness between Euro and non-Euro countries.
Objective 2: write competitiveness into the DNA of the whole European Union.
And this includes cutting the total burden on business.
Objective 3: exempt Britain from an ‘ever closer union’ and bolster national parliaments.
Not through warm words but through legally binding and irreversible changes.
And objective 4: tackle abuses of the right to free movement, and enable us to control migration from the European Union, in line with our manifesto.
The precise form all these changes will take will be a matter for the renegotiation.
But I want to be very clear: if we are able to reach agreement, it must be on a basis that is legally-binding and irreversible…
…and where necessary has force in the Treaties.
The negotiation
Now there will be some in Britain who say that what we are asking for is far too little.
And there will be some in European capitals who say that what we are asking for is far too much.
I say that what I am asking for is what is needed to fix the problems in Britain’s relationship with the European Union.
And that these measures, if adopted, will benefit the European Union as whole.
I have been Prime Minister for five and a half years.
I have sat in 39 European Council meetings with my fellow European leaders.
I have seen this relationship operating at close quarters; I see how much Britain can gain from its membership of the EU.
And I have seen where the problems lie.
I have thought very carefully about what is needed to fix those problems, and I have come up with a carefully-designed package to do so.
It is not outlandish or absurd.
It is right, and it is reasonable.
But I must be very, very clear.
I don’t want this reasonable approach to be misunderstood.
Reasonable does not mean lacking in resolve.
I understand, of course that every negotiation must involve just that – negotiation.
But Britain is the second biggest economy in the EU.
We are the second biggest contributor to the EU budget.
Along with France, we are its foremost military power.
We gain from the Union, but we bring a lot to it.
We believe very strongly that if a major Member State has major concerns…
…concerns which it has been voicing in a measured and constructive fashion over a number of years…
…then it is entitled to expect those concerns to be addressed.
At the heart of this negotiation is actually a very simple question: is the European Union flexible enough to accommodate the concerns of its very different member states?
The answer to that question must be yes, if the EU is to survive and prosper in the future – not just for Britain today, but for other member states, large and small, north and south, or the east or the west. The European Union has reached a decisive moment.
Now is the moment to ensure that membership of the European Union works for Euro and non-Euro members alike.
I think most people would find that an eminently reasonable proposition.
Already there have been productive rounds of talks with every European leader…
…with the Presidents of the European Council and Parliament…
…and of course with the President of the European Commission who has made this issue a priority and pledged his support for a fair deal for Britain.
So I have every confidence that we will achieve an agreement that works for Britain and works for our European partners.
And if and when we do so, as I said 3 years ago,…
…I will campaign to keep Britain inside a reformed European Union…
…I’ll campaign for it with all my heart and all my soul,…
…because that will be unambiguously in our national interest.
But if we can’t reach such an agreement,…
…and if Britain’s concerns were to be met with a deaf ear, which I do not believe will happen…
…then we will have to think again about whether this European Union is right for us.
As I have said before – I rule nothing out.
Best of both worlds
And to the British people I say this.
We have a long history of engaging with the best parts of what membership of the European Union has to offer…
…the parts that work for Britain, and our own history and traditions.
Already, we have ensured that as British people, we can travel freely around Europe, but at the same time we have maintained our own border controls.
We have kept our own currency while having complete access to the single market.
We cut the EU budget for the first time ever, while protecting the British rebate.
We successfully took Britain out of the Eurozone bailout mechanism – the first ever return of powers from Brussels to Westminster.
Through our opt-out from justice and home affairs matters, we have achieved the largest repatriation of powers to Britain since we joined the EU.
And when we have had to, we have used our veto – as I did to block a treaty that wasn’t in Britain’s national interest.
In other words, we have shown before that it is possible for Britain to find a way that works for us.
And I believe that we can do so again and that through this renegotiation we can have the best of both worlds.
We do not need to choose between being a marginalised voice within Europe…
…or an isolated voice outside it.
Let me explain what I mean.
Rejecting the status quo
Those who believe we should stay in the EU at all costs need to explain why Britain should accept the status quo.
I am clear that there are real problems for Britain with the status quo.
There are some economic risks, if we allow a situation where Eurozone countries could potentially spend our money…
…or where European regulations hold back our ability to trade and create jobs.
And there are also significant risks if we allow our sovereignty to be eroded by ever closer union…
…or sit by and do nothing about the unsustainable rate of migration into our country.
But just as those who are advocating staying in the EU at all costs have to answer serious questions…
…so those who think Britain should just leave now also need to think hard about the implications of their arguments – and the possible risks of the course they advocate.
What would being outside the European Union mean for our economic security?
And what would it mean for our national security?
Let me briefly take these questions in turn.
Economic security
First, our economic security.
Those who believe we should leave the EU, mostly argue that we would still seek a relationship with the single market…
….and that we would still build trade deals with the rest of the world.
So the question is how exactly would this work?
On the single market, some have suggested that we could be like Switzerland or Norway.
These countries are great friends of ours – but they are also very different from us.
Switzerland has had to negotiate access to the single market sector by sector.
Norway is part of the single market but has no say in setting its rules: it just has to implement its directives.
10,000 rules and regulations in the last 20 years, 5 for every day the Norwegian Parliament has been sitting.
So the irony is that if we followed the model of Norway, Europe’s political interference in our country could actually grow, rather than shrink.
Because here’s the rub.
The single market has rules.
We will not always get what we want from those rules.
But we have more influence over them from inside the EU, where those rules are actually made.
And on trade, those who advocate Britain leaving need to explain how the league of 1 will compare with the league of 28.
Negotiating as part of an economy with 500 million people gives us more power as a country, not less.
Our membership of the European Union gives us free trade agreements with more than 50 countries around the world.
Trying to recreate all of these deals from scratch on our own would not be a quick or easy process.
So we should be clear that leaving the EU is not some automatic fast track to a land of milk and honey.
National security
Just as there are difficult questions for our future prosperity outside the EU…
…so there are also important questions for our future security too.
In 2015, our membership of the European Union is not just a matter of trade and commerce, of pounds and pence.
It is about our national security as well as our economic security.
The world is undoubtedly a more dangerous place than when I made my speech at Bloomberg 3 years ago.
Then, ISIL didn’t exist. Now it controls substantial territory in Iraq and Syria and directly threatens our country.
Then, Ukraine was at peace. Now it is in crisis, after Russia invaded Crimea and Eastern Ukraine.
And of course the war in Syria has unleashed a wave of migration towards Europe which we see night after night on our television screens.
Britain has never joined the Schengen border-free zone, so we retain our border controls.
This, and our geographical status as an island, means we are less directly affected than other European countries by this crisis.
Our agreement with France, as a fellow EU member, means that our main border control with continental Europe effectively operates now at Calais, not Dover.
And our decision to admit 20,000 Syrian refugees from the camps was a British national sovereign decision.
But our membership of the EU does matter for our national security and for the security of our allies…
…which is one reason why our friends in the world strongly urge us to remain in the EU.
It is not just a question of strength in numbers, important though that is.
The EU, like NATO and our membership of the UN Security Council, is a tool that a British Prime Minister uses to get things done in the world, and protect our country.
When Russia invaded Ukraine, and European leaders met, it was Britain that pushed through sanctions to penalise Russia and ensure a robust response.
On Iran, it was Britain that helped impose the tough sanctions which got Iran to the negotiating table.
These things were done through the EU.
The point I am making is this – if the British Prime Minister was no longer present at European summits, we would lose that voice and therefore permanently change our ability to get things done in the world.
We have every right to do that as a sovereign nation.
But we should do so with our eyes open.
Britain’s future
I am not saying for one moment that Britain couldn’t survive outside the European Union.
Of course we could.
We are a great country.
The fifth largest economy in the world.
The fastest growing economy in the G7 last year.
The biggest destination for foreign direct investment in the EU.
Our capital city a global icon.
The world, literally, speaks our language.
Last month the President of China spent a week in this country.
This week the Prime Minister of India will visit.
They see a great future for this country that we all love.
No one doubts that Britain is a proud, successful thriving country.
A nation that has turned round its fortunes though its own efforts.
A far cry from the ‘sick man of Europe’ at the time we entered the European Economic Community 4 decades ago.
Whether we could be successful outside the European Union – that’s not the question.
The question is whether we would be more successful in than out?
Whether being in the European Union adds to our economic security or detracts from it?
Whether being in the European Union makes us safer or less safe?
That is a matter of judgment.
And ultimately it will be the judgment of the British people in the referendum that I promised and that I will deliver.
You will have to judge what is best for you and your family, for your children and grandchildren, for our country, for our future.
It will be your decision whether to remain in the EU on the basis of the reforms we secure, or whether we leave.
Your decision.
Nobody else’s.
Not politicians’.
Not Parliament’s.
Not lobby groups’.
Not mine.
Just you.
You, the British people, will decide.
At that moment, you will hold this country’s destiny in your hands.
This is a huge decision for our country, perhaps the biggest we will make in our lifetimes.
And it will be the final decision.
So to those who suggest that a decision in the referendum to leave…
…would merely produce another stronger renegotiation and then a second referendum in which Britain would stay…
…I say think again.
The renegotiation is happening right now. And the referendum that follows will be a once in a generation choice.
An in or out referendum.
When the British people speak, their voice will be respected – not ignored.
If we vote to leave, then we will leave.
There will not be another renegotiation and another referendum.
So I say to my European counterparts with whom I am negotiating.
This is our only chance to get this right – for Britain and for the whole European Union.
I say to those who are thinking about voting to leave.
Think very carefully, because this choice cannot be undone.
And to those who are campaigning to leave but actually hoping for a second referendum – I say decide what you believe in.
If you think we should leave – and leave means leave – then campaign for that and vote for it.
But if you are actually arguing for a better relationship between Britain and the European Union, then don’t campaign to get out.
Work with me to get that better deal for Britain.
Conclusion
And so?
I have set out today the changes I want to see, and which Britain needs to see.
There will be those who say – here and elsewhere in the EU – that we are embarked on ‘mission impossible’.
I say: why?
I do not deny that seeking changes which require the agreement of 27 other democracies, all with their own concerns, is a big task.
But an impossible one?
I do not believe so for a minute.
When you look at the challenges facing European leaders today, the changes that Britain is seeking do not fall in the box marked ‘impossible’.
They are eminently resolvable, with the requisite political will and political imagination.
The European Union has a record of solving intractable problems. It can solve this one too.
Let us therefore resolve to do so.
Because the prize is a big one.
A new kind of European Union.
A European Union which could lead the world in competitiveness, be a magnet for start-ups, a beacon of jobs and growth.
A European Union in which those countries inside and outside the Euro could both have their interests fully protected.
A European Union, which could recognise the different visions of its members,…
…and celebrate their diversity as a source of strength.
A European Union in which those who wished to proceed towards a political union could continue to do so…
…but where it would have been clearly accepted that Britain would not take part in such an endeavour.
A European Union in which the United Kingdom could exert greater control over the numbers coming to our country.
In other words, a European Union with the flexibility needed to ensure that all its members felt their particular membership worked well for them…
…and our British model of membership worked well for us.
I have no doubt that with patience, with goodwill, with ingenuity, it can be done.
And that in doing so we can make Britain and the whole of Europe safer and more prosperous for generations to come.

Introduction
In 45 days’ time, the British people will go to polling stations across our islands and cast their ballots in the way we have done in this country for generations.
They will, as usual, weigh up the arguments, reflect on them quietly, discuss them with friends and family, and then, calmly and without fuss, take their decision.
But this time, their decision will not be for a Parliament, or even two.
They will decide the destiny of our country, not for 5 years or for 10, but in all probability for decades, perhaps a lifetime.
This is a decision that is bigger than any individual politician or government.
It will have real, permanent and direct consequences for this country and every person living in it.
Should we continue to forge our future as a proud, independent nation while remaining a member of the European Union, as we have been for the last 43 years? Or should we abandon it?
Let me say at the outset that I understand why many people are wrestling with this decision, and why some people’s heads and hearts are torn.
And I understand and respect the views of those who think we should leave, even if I believe they are wrong and that leaving would inflict real damage on our country, its economy and its power in the world.
Where I stand
I believe that, despite its faults and its frustrations, the United Kingdom is stronger, safer and better off by remaining a member of the European Union. Better off? Certainly.
We are part of a single market of 500 million people which Britain helped to create. Our goods and, crucially, our services – which account for almost 80% of our economy – can trade freely by right. We help decide the rules. The advantages of this far outweigh any disadvantages.
Our membership of the single market is one of the reasons why our economy is doing so well, why we have created almost 2.4 million jobs over the last 6 years, and why so many companies from overseas – from China or India, the United States, Australia and other Commonwealth countries invest so much in the UK.
It is one of the factors – together with our superb workforce, the low taxes set by the British government, and our climate of enterprise – which makes Britain such an excellent place to do business.
All this is alongside – let us note – our attractive regulatory environment. According to the OECD, it is second only to the Netherlands, itself an EU member – giving the lie to those who claim that the British economy is being strangled by regulation from Brussels.
If we leave, the only certainty we will have is uncertainty.
The Treasury has calculated that the cost to every household in Britain would be as high as £4,300 by 2030 if we leave. £4,300.
The overwhelming weight of independent opinion – from the International Monetary Fund to the OECD, from the London School of Economics to the Institute for Fiscal Studies – also supports the fact that Britain will suffer an immediate economic shock, and then be permanently poorer for the long-term.
The evidence is clear: we will be better off in, and poorer if we leave.
As Charles Dunstone, the founder of Carphone Warehouse, an entrepreneur not averse to risk, has said: “In my experience there are calculated risks, there are clever risks, and there are unnecessary and dangerous risks. And from all I can conclude, Brexit sits firmly in the latter camp.”
So the onus is on those who advocate leaving to prove that Britain will be better off outside the EU. Those advocating Brexit have spent many years preparing for this moment. And yet they seem unable to set out a clear, comprehensive plan for our future outside the EU.
Some admit there would be a severe economic shock, but assert nonchalantly that it would be ‘a price worth paying’.
Others are in denial that there would be a shock at all. And they can’t agree what their plan for post-Brexit Britain would look like.
One minute we are urged to follow Norway, the next minute Canada. A few days later Switzerland offers the path forward, until it becomes clear that their arrangement doesn’t provide much access for services to the EU’s single market – and services, as I’ve said, are almost 4 fifths of the British economy.
Most recently, the Leavers have noticed that a number of European countries that sit outside of the EU have negotiated separate trade arrangements with the EU.
They called this collection of countries the ‘European free trade zone’.
But in fact, this doesn’t exist: it is a patchwork of different arrangements, all of them far inferior to what we have now.
They have gone on to suggest that Britain might join this non-existent zone, just like Albania.
Seriously? Even the Albanian Prime Minister thought that idea was a joke.
The Leave campaign are asking us to take a massive risk with the future of our economy and the future of our country.
And yet they can’t even answer the most basic questions.
What would Britain’s relationship be with the EU if we were to leave? Will we have a free trade agreement, or will we fall back on World Trade Organisation rules?
The man who headed the WTO for 8 years thinks this would be and I quote “a terrible replacement for access to the EU single market.”
Some of them say we would keep full access to the EU single market.
If so, we would have to accept freedom of movement, a contribution to the EU budget, and accept all EU rules while surrendering any say over them.
In which case, we would have given up sovereignty rather than taken it back.
Others say we would definitely leave the single market – including, yesterday, the Vote Leave campaign – despite the critical importance of the single market to jobs and investment in our country.
I can only describe this as a reckless and irresponsible course. These are people’s jobs and livelihoods that are being toyed with.
And the Leave campaign have no answers to the most basic questions.
What access would we try to secure back into the single market from the outside? How long would it take to negotiate a new relationship with the EU? What would happen to the 53 trade deals we have with other markets around the world through the EU?
The Leave campaign can’t answer them because they don’t know the answers. They have no plan.
And yet sceptical voters who politely ask for answers are denounced for their lack of faith in Britain, or met with sweeping assurances that the world will simply jump to our tune.
If you were buying a house or a car, you wouldn’t do it without insisting on seeing what was being offered, and making sure it wasn’t going to fall apart the moment you took possession of it.
So why would you do so when the future of your entire country is at stake?
The British people will keep asking these questions every day between now and 23 June, and demanding some answers.
Nothing is more important than the strength of our economy.
Upon it depends the jobs and livelihoods of our people, and also the strength and security of our nation.
If we stay, we know what we get – continued full access to a growing single market, including in energy, services and digital, together with the benefit of the huge trade deals in prospect between the EU and the United States and other large markets.
If we leave, it is – genuinely – a leap in the dark.
But my main focus today will not be on the economic reasons to remain in the EU, important though they are.
I want to concentrate instead on what our membership means for our strength and security in the world, and the safety of our people, and to explain why, again, I believe the balance of advantage comes down firmly in favour of staying rather than leaving.
Because this decision is a decision about our place in the world, about how we keep our country safe, about how Britain can get things done – in Europe and across the world – and not just accept a world dictated by others.
A proud, confident nation
So today I want to set out the big, bold patriotic case for Britain to remain a member of the EU.
I want to show that if you love this country, if you want to keep it strong in the world, and keep our people safe, our membership of the EU is one of the tools – one of the tools – that helps us to do these things, like our membership of other international bodies such as NATO or the UN Security Council.
Let us accept that for all our differences, one thing unites both sides in this referendum campaign.
We love this country, and we want the best future for it. Ours is a great country.
Not just a great country in the history books, although it surely is that.
But a great country right now, with the promise of becoming even greater tomorrow.
We’re the fifth largest economy in the world. Europe’s foremost military power. Our capital city is a global icon. Our national language the world’s language.
Our national flag is worn on clothing and t-shirts the world over – not only as a fashion statement, but as a symbol of hope and a beacon for liberal values all around the world.
People from all 4 corners of the earth watch our films, dance to our music, flock to our galleries and theatres, cheer on our football teams and cherish our institutions.
These days, even our food is admired the world over.
Our national broadcaster is one of the most recognised brands on the planet, and our monarch is one of the most respected people in the world.
Britain today is a proud, successful, thriving nation, a nation the world admires and looks up to, and whose best days lie ahead of it.
We are the product of our long history – of the decision of our forebears, of the heroism of our parents and grandparents.
And yet we are a country that also has our eyes fixed firmly on the future – that is a pioneer in the modern world: from the birth of the internet to the decoding of the genome.
The character of the British people
If there is one constant in the ebb and flow of our island story, it is the character of the British people.
Our geography has shaped us, and shapes us today. We are special, different, unique.
We have the character of an island nation which has not been invaded for almost a thousand years, and which has built institutions which have endured for centuries.
As a people we are ambitious, resilient, independent-minded. And, I might add, tolerant, generous, and inventive.
But above all we are obstinately practical, rigorously down to earth, natural debunkers.
We approach issues with a cast of mind rooted in common sense. We are rightly suspicious of ideology, and sceptical of grand schemes and grandiose promises.
So we have always seen the European Union as a means to an end – the way to boost our prosperity and help anchor peace and stability across the European continent – but we don’t see it as an end in itself.
We insistently ask: why? How?
And as we weigh up the competing arguments in this referendum campaign, we must apply that practical rigour which is the hallmark of being British.
Would going it alone make Britain more powerful in the world? Would we be better able to get our way, or less able?
Would going it alone make us more secure from terrorism, or would it be better to remain and cooperate closely with our neighbours?
Would going it alone really give us more control over our affairs, or would we soon find that actually we had less, and that we had given up a secure future for one beset by years of uncertainty and trouble with no way back?
Would going it alone open up new opportunities, or would it in fact close them down and narrow our options?
Stronger in the world
That is certainly the approach I have taken to judging whether Britain is stronger and safer inside the European Union or leaving it.
And I have just one yardstick: how do we best advance our national interest?
Keeping our people safe at home and abroad, and moulding the world in the way that we want – more peaceful, more stable, more free, with the arteries of commerce and trade flowing freely.
That is our national interest in a nutshell – and it’s the question that has confronted every British prime minister since the office was created: how do we best advance Britain’s interests in the circumstances of the day?
If my experience as Prime Minister had taught me that our membership of the EU was holding Britain back or undermining our global influence, I would not hesitate to recommend that we should leave.
But my experience is the opposite.
The reason that I want Britain to stay in a reformed EU is in part because of my experience over the last 6 years is that it does help make our country better off, safer and stronger.
And there are 4 reasons why this is the case.
First, what happens in Europe affects us, whether we like it or not, so we must be strong in Europe if we want to be strong at home and in the world.
Second, the dangerous international situation facing Britain today, means that the closest possible cooperation with our European neighbours isn’t an optional extra – it is essential. We need to stand united. Now is a time for strength in numbers.
Third, keeping our people safe from modern terrorist networks like Daesh and from serious crime that increasingly crosses borders means that we simply have to develop much closer means of security cooperation between countries within Europe. Britain needs to be fully engaged with that.
Fourth, far from Britain’s influence in the world being undermined by our membership of the EU, it amplifies our power, like our membership of the UN or of NATO. It helps us achieve the things we want – whether it is fighting Ebola in Africa, tackling climate change, taking on the people smugglers. That’s not just our view; it’s the view of our friends and allies, too.
Let me go through them in turn.
What happens in Europe affects us
First: Europe is our immediate neighbourhood, and what happens on the continent affects us profoundly, whether we like it or not.
Our history teaches us: the stronger we are in our neighbourhood, the stronger we are in the world.
For 2,000 years, our affairs have been intertwined with the affairs of Europe. For good or ill, we have written Europe’s history just as Europe has helped to write ours.
From Caesar’s legions to the wars of the Spanish Succession, from the Napoleonic Wars to the fall of the Berlin Wall.
Proud as we are of our global reach and our global connections, Britain has always been a European power, and we always will be.
We know that to be a global power and to be a European power are not mutually exclusive.
And the moments of which we are rightly most proud in our national story include pivotal moments in European history.
Blenheim. Trafalgar. Waterloo. Our country’s heroism in the Great War.
And most of all our lone stand in 1940, when Britain stood as a bulwark against a new dark age of tyranny and oppression.
When I sit in the Cabinet Room, I never forget the decisions that were taken in that room in those darkest of times.
When I fly to European summits in Brussels from RAF Northolt, I pass a Spitfire just outside the airfield, a vital base for brave RAF and Polish pilots during the Battle of Britain.
I think of the Few who saved this country in its hour of mortal danger, and who made it possible for us to go on and help liberate Europe.
Like any Brit, my heart swells with pride at the sight of that aircraft, or whenever I hear the tell-tale roar of those Merlin engines over our skies in the summer.
Defiant, brave, indefatigable.
But it wasn’t through choice that Britain was alone. Churchill never wanted that. Indeed he spent the months before the Battle of Britain trying to keep our French allies in the war, and then after France fell, he spent the next 18 months persuading the United States to come to our aid.
And in the post-war period he argued passionately for Western Europe to come together, to promote free trade, and to build institutions which would endure so that our continent would never again see such bloodshed.
Isolationism has never served this country well. Whenever we turn our back on Europe, sooner or later we come to regret it.
We have always had to go back in, and always at a much higher cost.
The serried rows of white headstones in lovingly-tended Commonwealth war cemeteries stand as silent testament to the price that this country has paid to help restore peace and order in Europe.
Can we be so sure that peace and stability on our continent are assured beyond any shadow of doubt? Is that a risk worth taking?
I would never be so rash as to make that assumption.
It’s barely been 20 years since war in the Balkans and genocide on our continent in Srebrenica. In the last few years, we have seen tanks rolling into Georgia and Ukraine. And of this I am completely sure.
The European Union has helped reconcile countries which were once at each others’ throats for decades. Britain has a fundamental national interest in maintaining common purpose in Europe to avoid future conflict between European countries.
And that requires British leadership, and for Britain to remain a member. The truth is this: what happens in our neighbourhood matters to Britain.
That was true in 1914, in 1940 and in 1989. Or, you could add 1588, 1704 and 1815. And it is just as true in 2016.
Either we influence Europe, or it influences us.
And if things go wrong in Europe, let’s not pretend we can be immune from the consequences.
The international situation means cooperation with Europe is essential
Second, the international situation confronting Britain today means that the closest possible cooperation with our European neighbours isn’t an optional extra.
It is essential for this country’s security and our ability to get things done in the world.
We see a newly belligerent Russia. The rise of the Daesh network to our east and to our south. The migration crisis. Dealing with these requires unity of purpose in the west.
Sometimes you hear the Leave campaign talk about these issues as if they are – in and of themselves – reasons to leave the EU.
But we can’t change the continent to which we are attached. We can’t tow our island to a more congenial part of the world.
The threats affect us whether we’re in the EU or not, and Britain washing its hands of helping to deal with them will only make the problems worse.
Within Europe they require a shared approach by the European democracies, more than at any time since the height of the Cold War.
It is true, of course, that it is to NATO and to the Transatlantic Alliance that we look to for our defence.
The principle enshrined in the North Atlantic Treaty – that an attack on one is an attack on all – that remains the cornerstone of our national defence.
That fundamental sharing of national sovereignty in order to deter potential aggressors. That is as valid today as it was when NATO was founded in 1949.
It is an example of how real control is more important than the theory of sovereignty.
The European Union – and the close culture of intergovernmental cooperation between governments which it embodies – is a vital tool in our armoury to deal with these threats.
That is why NATO and top military opinion – British, American, European – is clear that the common purpose of the EU does not undermine NATO, it is a vital reinforcement to it.
And they are equally crystal clear: Britain’s departure would weaken solidarity and the unity of the west as a whole.
Now some of those who wish us to leave the EU openly say that they hope the entire organisation will unravel as a result.
I find this extraordinary.
How could it possibly be in our interests to risk the clock being turned back to an age of competing nationalisms in Europe?
And for Britain, of all countries, to be responsible for triggering such a collapse would be an act of supreme irresponsibility, entirely out of character for us as a nation.
Others suggest that Britain stalking out could lead to and I quote “the democratic liberation of an entire continent”.
Well, tell that to the Poles, the Czechs, the Baltic States and the other countries of central and eastern Europe which languished for so long behind the Iron Curtain.
They cherish their liberty and their democracy. They see Britain as the country that did more than any other to unlock their shackles and enable them to take their rightful place in the family of European nations.
And frankly they view the prospect of Britain leaving the EU with utter dismay. They watch what is happening in Moscow with alarm and trepidation.
Now is a time for strength in numbers. Now is the worst possible time for Britain to put that at risk. Only our adversaries will benefit.
Security risks
Now third, the evolving threats to our security and the rise of the Daesh network mean that we have to change the way we work to keep our people safe. Security today is not only a matter of hard defence, of stopping tanks – it is also about rooting out terrorist networks, just as it is about detecting illegal immigrants, stopping human trafficking and organised crime. And that makes much closer security cooperation between our European nations essential.
I have no greater responsibility than the safety of the people of this country, and keeping us safe from the terrorist threat.
As the Home Secretary said in her speech a fortnight ago: being in the EU helps to makes us safer.
We shouldn’t put ourselves at risk by leaving.
One of her predecessors, Charles Clarke, reiterated that only this morning.
And the message of Jonathan Evans and John Sawers, former heads of MI5 and MI6 respectively, is absolutely unmistakable: Britain is safer inside the European Union.
During the last 6 years, the terrorist threat against this country has grown.
Our threat level is now at ‘Severe’, which means that an attack is ‘highly likely’. Indeed such an attack could happen at any time.
But the threat has not only grown, it has changed in its nature.
The attacks in Paris and Brussels are a reminder that we face this threat together – and we will only succeed in overcoming it by working much more closely together.
These terrorists operate throughout Europe; their networks use technology to spread their poison and to organise beyond geographical limits.
People say that to keep our defences up, you need a border. And they’re right.
That’s why we kept our borders, and we can check any passport – including for EU nationals – and we retain control over who we allow into our country.
But against the modern threat, having a border isn’t enough. You also need information, you need data, you need intelligence. You need to cooperate with others to create mechanisms for sharing this information.
And, just as the Home Secretary said a fortnight ago, I can tell you this: whether it’s working together to share intelligence on suspected terrorists; whether it’s strengthening aviation security; addressing the challenge of cybercrime; preventing cross-border trade in firearms; tackling the migration crisis; or enhancing our own border security, the EU is not some peripheral institution, or a hindrance we have to work around – it is now an absolutely central part of how Britain can get things done.
Not by creating a vast new EU bureaucracy. Nor by sucking away the role and capabilities of our own world beating intelligence and law enforcement agencies.
But because their superb work depends on much closer cooperation between European governments and much faster and more determined action across Europe to deal with this new threat.
As the historian Niall Ferguson observed, it takes a network to defeat a network.
And European measures are a key weapon.
The European Arrest Warrant allows us to bring criminals and terrorists, like one of the failed 21/7 Tube bombers who had fled to Italy, we can bring them back to the UK to face justice straight away.
Our membership of Europol gives us access to important databases that help us to identify criminals.
And we have begun to cooperate on DNA and fingerprint matching across borders, too. These tools help us in real-time, life-or-death situations.
One of the Paris attackers, Salah Abdeslam, was only identified quickly after the attack because the French police were able to use EU powers to exchange DNA and fingerprints with the Belgians.
Before this cooperation, DNA matching between 2 countries didn’t take minutes, it could take over 4 months.
In the last few months alone, we have agreed a new Passenger Name Records directive, so that EU countries will have access to airline passenger data to enable us to identify those on terror watch-lists.
These new arrangements will also provide crucial details about how the tickets were bought, the bank accounts used and the people they are travelling with.
And the EU has recently switched on a new database, called SIS II, which is providing real-time alerts for suspected jihadists and other serious criminals.
Now I don’t argue that if we left we would lose any ability to cooperate with our neighbours on a bilateral basis, or even potentially through some EU mechanisms.
But it is clear that leaving the EU will make cooperation more legally complex – and make our access to vital information much slower and more difficult.
Look at for instance Norway and Iceland: they began negotiating an extradition agreement with the EU in 2001 and yet today it is still not in force.
And of course we will miss out on the benefits of these new arrangements, and any that develop in future.
Now you can take the view that we don’t need this cooperation – that we can just do without these extra capabilities.
That in my view is a totally complacent view. Especially in a world where the difference between a prevented attack and a successful attack can be just 1 missing piece of data; 1 piece of the jigsaw that the agencies found just too late.
You can also decide, as some on the Leave side seriously do, that even though working together is helpful for keeping us safe, it involves giving up too much sovereignty and ceding too much power over security cooperation to the European Court of Justice.
My view is this: when terrorists are planning to kill and maim people on British streets, the closest possible security cooperation is far more important than sovereignty in its purest theoretical form. I want to give our country real power, not the illusion of power.
Britain’s power in the world
Fourth, Britain’s unique position and power in the world is not defined by our membership of the EU, any more than it is by our membership of the Commonwealth or the UN Security Council or the OECD or the IMF or the myriad other international organisations to which we belong.
But our EU membership, like our membership of other international organisations, magnifies our national power.
Britain is a global nation, with a global role and a global reach.
We take our own decisions, in our own interests. We always have done, we always will do.
In the years since we joined the EU, we have shown that time and again with British, national, sovereign decisions about our foreign and defence policy taken by British prime ministers and British ministers.
Liberating the Falkland Islands in a great feat of military endeavour. Freeing Kuwait from Iraq.
And, more recently, our mission to prevent Afghanistan continuing to be a safe haven for international terrorists.
As I speak here today, we are flying policing missions over the Baltic states. Training security forces in Nigeria. And of course, taking the fight to Daesh in Syria and Iraq.
So the idea that our membership of the EU has emasculated our power as a nation – this is complete nonsense.
Indeed, over the last 40 years, our global power has grown, not diminished.
In the years before we joined the EU, British governments presided over a steady retrenchment of our world role, borne of our economic weakness.
The decision to retreat East of Suez and abandon our aircraft carriers was taken in 1968.
Since then, starting with the transformation of our economy by Margaret Thatcher, we have turned around our fortunes.
In the 21st century, Britain is once again a country that is advancing, not retreating,
We have reversed the East of Suez policy, we are building permanent military bases in the Gulf, we are opening embassies all around the world, particularly in Asia.
We have a new strategic relationship with both China and India, have committed to spending 2% of our GDP on defence – 1 of only 5 NATO nations to be meeting that target.
Our expertise in aid, development and responding to crises is admired the world over.
We are renewing our independent nuclear deterrent.
Our 2 new aircraft carriers will be the biggest warships the Royal Navy has ever put to sea.
These are the actions of a proud, independent, self-confident, go-getting nation, a nation that is confident and optimistic about its future, not one cowed and shackled by its membership of the European Union.
On the contrary, our membership of the EU is one of the tools – just one - which we use, as we do our membership of NATO, or the Commonwealth, or the Five Power Defence Agreement with Australia, New Zealand and our allies in South East Asia, to amplify British power and to enhance our influence in the world.
Decisions on foreign policy are taken by unanimity. Britain has a veto.
So suggestions of an EU army are fanciful: national security is a national competence, and we would veto any suggestion of an EU army.
And as we sit in Britain’s National Security Council, time and again I know that making Britain’s actions count for far more means working with other countries in the EU.
Let me just take 3 specific examples of what I mean.
When Russia invaded Crimea and Eastern Ukraine, there was a real risk of a feeble European response, and of a split between the United States and Europe.
I convened a special meeting of the key European countries in Brussels, agreed a package of sanctions, and then drove that package through the full meeting of EU leaders – the European Council – later that same evening. I could not have done that outside the EU.
An example of Britain injecting steel into Europe’s actions; delivering sanctions which have been far more effective because 28 countries are implementing them, not just the UK. And at the same time, we maintained that crucial unity between Europe and the US in the face of Russian aggression.
On Iran, again, it was Britain that pushed hardest for the implementation of an EU oil embargo against that country.
And it was the embargo which helped bring Iran to the negotiating table, and ultimately led to the UN sanctions that led to Iran abandoning its ambition to build a nuclear weapon. Who led those negotiations? It was the EU, with Britain playing a central role.
And on Ebola, it was Britain that used a European Council to push leaders into massively increasing Europe’s financial contribution to tackling the disease in West Africa, thereby helping to contain and deal with what was a major public health emergency.
If Britain left the EU, we would lose that tool.
The German Chancellor would be there. The French President. The Italian Prime Minister. So would the Maltese, the Slovak, the Czech, the Polish, the Slovene, as well as all the others.
But Britain – the fifth largest economy in the world, the second biggest in Europe – would be absent, outside the room.
We would no longer take those decisions which have a direct bearing on Britain.
Instead we would have to establish an enormous diplomatic mission in Brussels to try and lobby participants before those meetings took place, and to try and then find out what had happened at them once they broke up.
Would we really be sitting around congratulating ourselves on how ‘sovereign’ we feel, without any control over events that affect us?
What an abject act of national retreat that would be for our great country, a diminution of Britain’s power inflicted for the first time in our history not by economic woe or military defeat, but entirely of our own accord.
And when it comes to the strength of our United Kingdom, we should never forget that our strength is that of a voluntary union of 4 nations. So let me just say this about Scotland: you don’t renew your country by taking a decision that could, ultimately, lead to its disintegration.
So as we weigh up this decision, let’s do so with our eyes open.
And, of course, there is something closely connected to our power and influence that is absolutely vital: and that’s the view of Britain’s closest friends and allies.
Before you take any big decision in life, it’s natural to consult those who wish you well, those who are with you in the tough times as well as in the good.
Sometimes they offer contradictory advice. Sometimes they don’t have much of a view.
That’s not the case here.
Our allies have a very clear view. They want us to remain members of the European Union.
Not only our fellow members of the EU – they want us to stay, and could be resentful if we chose to leave.
The Leave campaign keep telling us that there is a big world out there, if only we could lift our sights beyond Europe.
But the problem is they don’t seem to hearing what that big world is saying.
There is our principal and indispensable ally, the guarantor of our security – the United States – whose President made the American position very plain, as only the oldest and best friends can.
And then there are the nations to which we are perhaps closest in the world, our cousins in Australia and New Zealand, whose prime ministers have spoken out so clearly.
The Secretary-General of NATO says that a weakened and divided Europe would be “bad for security and bad for NATO”.
Only on Thursday, the Japanese Prime Minister – whose country is such a huge investor and employer in the United Kingdom – made very clear that Japan hoped the UK would decide to remain in the EU.
So too have big emerging economies like Indonesia.
And then there are our major new trading and strategic relationships – China and India – in whom some of the Leave campaign claim to invest such great hopes, at least when they’re not saying they want to impose hefty tariffs on them. They too want us to remain in the EU.
So from America to Asia, from Australasia and the Indian sub-continent, our friends and our biggest trading partners, or potential trading partners, are telling us very clearly: it’s your decision. But we hope you vote to stay in the European Union.
By the way, so too are our own Dependent Territories – Gibraltar and the Falkland Islands – with whom we have such a special bond and for whom we have a special responsibility.
Conclusion
And so? Next month we will make our choice as a nation.
I am very clear.
Britain is stronger and safer in the EU, as well as better off.
And the EU benefits from Britain being inside rather than out.
This is a Europe that Britain has helped to shape.
A continent that Britain helped liberate not once in the last century, but twice.
And we always wanted 2 things from the EU.
One: the creation of a vast single market; one we thought would benefit our economy enormously and spread prosperity throughout our neighbourhood.
And two: a Europe in which Britain helped the nations which languished under Communism return to the European fold; nations who still look to us as a friend and protector and do not want us to abandon them now.
We’ve got both of those things.
We did all that.
And imagine if we hadn’t been there.
Who would have driven forward the single market?
Who would have prevented Europe from becoming a protectionist bloc?
Who would have stopped the EU from becoming a single currency zone?
Who would have stood up and said no to those pushing for political union?
Who would have done these things?
Because the truth is that if we were not in it, the European Union would in all likelihood still exist.
So we would still have to deal with it.
Now we have the opportunity to have what we have always wanted: to be in the single market, but out of the euro.
To be at the European Council, with our full voting and veto rights, but specifically exempted from ever closer union.
To have the opportunity to work, live and travel in other EU countries, but to retain full controls at our border.
To take part in the home affairs cooperation that benefits our security, but outside those measures we don’t like.
And to keep our currency.
That is, frankly, the best of both worlds.
No wonder our friends and allies want us to take it. To lead, not to quit.
It is what the Chinese call a win win.
The Americans would probably say it’s a slam dunk.
We are Britain.
No one seriously suggests any more that after 40 years in the EU, we have become less British.
We’re proud. We’re independent.
We get things done.
So let’s not walk away from the institutions that help us to win in the world.
Let’s not walk away from the EU, any more than we would walk away from the UN, or from NATO.
We’re bigger than that.
So I say – instead, let us remain, let us fight our corner, let us play the part we should, as a great power in the world, and a great and growing power in Europe.
That is the big, bold, and patriotic decision for Britain on 23 June.

This morning I want to talk about the future of Europe.
But first, let us remember the past.
Seventy years ago, Europe was being torn apart by its second catastrophic conflict in a generation.
A war which saw the streets of European cities strewn with rubble.
The skies of London lit by flames night after night.
And millions dead across the world in the battle for peace and liberty.
As we remember their sacrifice, so we should also remember how the shift in Europe from war to sustained peace came about.
It did not happen like a change in the weather.
It happened because of determined work over generations.
A commitment to friendship and a resolve never to re-visit that dark past - a commitment epitomised by the Elysee Treaty signed 50 years ago this week.
After the Berlin Wall came down I visited that city and I will never forget it.
The abandoned checkpoints.
The sense of excitement about the future.
The knowledge that a great continent was coming together.
Healing those wounds of our history is the central story of the European Union.
What Churchill described as the twin marauders of war and tyranny have been almost entirely banished from our continent.
Today, hundreds of millions dwell in freedom, from the Baltic to the Adriatic, from the Western Approaches to the Aegean.
And while we must never take this for granted, the first purpose of the European Union – to secure peace – has been achieved and we should pay tribute to all those in the EU, alongside NATO, who made that happen.
But today the main, over-riding purpose of the European Union is different: not to win peace, but to secure prosperity.
The challenges come not from within this continent but outside it.
From the surging economies in the East and South.
Of course a growing world economy benefits us all, but we should be in no doubt that a new global race of nations is underway today.
A race for the wealth and jobs of the future.
The map of global influence is changing before our eyes.
And these changes are already being felt by the entrepreneur in the Netherlands, the worker in Germany, the family in Britain.
So I want to speak to you today with urgency and frankness about the European Union and how it must change – both to deliver prosperity and to retain the support of its peoples.
But first, I want to set out the spirit in which I approach these issues.
I know that the United Kingdom is sometimes seen as an argumentative and rather strong-minded member of the family of European nations.
And it’s true that our geography has shaped our psychology.
We have the character of an island nation – independent, forthright, passionate in defence of our sovereignty.
We can no more change this British sensibility than we can drain the English Channel.
And because of this sensibility, we come to the European Union with a frame of mind that is more practical than emotional.
For us, the European Union is a means to an end – prosperity, stability, the anchor of freedom and democracy both within Europe and beyond her shores - not an end in itself.
We insistently ask: How? Why? To what end? But all this doesn’t make us somehow un-European.
The fact is that ours is not just an island story – it is also a continental story.
For all our connections to the rest of the world – of which we are rightly proud - we have always been a European power – and we always will be.
From Caesar’s legions to the Napoleonic Wars.
From the Reformation, the Enlightenment and the Industrial Revolution to the defeat of Nazism.
We have helped to write European history, and Europe has helped write ours.
Over the years, Britain has made her own, unique contribution to Europe.
We have provided a haven to those fleeing tyranny and persecution.
And in Europe’s darkest hour, we helped keep the flame of liberty alight.
Across the continent, in silent cemeteries, lie the hundreds of thousands of British servicemen who gave their lives for Europe’s freedom.
In more recent decades, we have played our part in tearing down the Iron Curtain and championing the entry into the EU of those countries that lost so many years to Communism.
And contained in this history is the crucial point about Britain, our national character, our attitude to Europe.
Britain is characterised not just by its independence but, above all, by its openness.
We have always been a country that reaches out.
That turns its face to the world…That leads the charge in the fight for global trade and against protectionism.
This is Britain today, as it’s always been:Independent, yes – but open, too.
I never want us to pull up the drawbridge and retreat from the world.
I am not a British isolationist.
I don’t just want a better deal for Britain.
I want a better deal for Europe too.
So I speak as British Prime Minister with a positive vision for the future of the European Union.
A future in which Britain wants, and should want, to play a committed and active part.
Some might then ask: why raise fundamental questions about the future of Europe when Europe is already in the midst of a deep crisis? Why raise questions about Britain’s role when support in Britain is already so thin.
There are always voices saying “don’t ask the difficult questions.” But it’s essential for Europe – and for Britain - that we do because there are three major challenges confronting us today.
First, the problems in the Eurozone are driving fundamental change in Europe.
Second, there is a crisis of European competitiveness, as other nations across the world soar ahead.
And third, there is a gap between the EU and its citizens which has grown dramatically in recent years.
And which represents a lack of democratic accountability and consent that is – yes – felt particularly acutely in Britain.
If we don’t address these challenges, the danger is that Europe will fail and the British people will drift towards the exit.
I do not want that to happen.
I want the European Union to be a success.
And I want a relationship between Britain and the EU that keeps us in it.
That is why I am here today: To acknowledge the nature of the challenges we face.
To set out how I believe the European Union should respond to them.
And to explain what I want to achieve for Britain and its place within the European Union.
Let me start with the nature of the challenges we face.
First, the Eurozone.
The future shape of Europe is being forged.
There are some serious questions that will define the future of the European Union – and the future of every country within it.
The Union is changing to help fix the currency – and that has profound implications for all of us, whether we are in the single currency or not.
Britain is not in the single currency, and we’re not going to be.
But we all need the Eurozone to have the right governance and structures to secure a successful currency for the long term.
And those of us outside the Eurozone also need certain safeguards to ensure, for example, that our access to the Single Market is not in any way compromised.
And it’s right we begin to address these issues now.
Second, while there are some countries within the EU which are doing pretty well.
Taken as a whole, Europe’s share of world output is projected to fall by almost a third in the next two decades.
This is the competitiveness challenge – and much of our weakness in meeting it is self-inflicted.
Complex rules restricting our labour markets are not some naturally occurring phenomenon.
Just as excessive regulation is not some external plague that's been visited on our businesses.
These problems have been around too long.
And the progress in dealing with them, far too slow.
As Chancellor Merkel has said - if Europe today accounts for just over 7 per cent of the world's population, produces around 25 per cent of global GDP and has to finance 50 per cent of global social spending, then it's obvious that it will have to work very hard to maintain its prosperity and way of life.
Third, there is a growing frustration that the EU is seen as something that is done to people rather than acting on their behalf.
And this is being intensified by the very solutions required to resolve the economic problems.
People are increasingly frustrated that decisions taken further and further away from them mean their living standards are slashed through enforced austerity or their taxes are used to bail out governments on the other side of the continent.
We are starting to see this in the demonstrations on the streets of Athens, Madrid and Rome.
We are seeing it in the parliaments of Berlin, Helsinki and the Hague.
And yes, of course, we are seeing this frustration with the EU very dramatically in Britain.
Europe’s leaders have a duty to hear these concerns.
Indeed, we have a duty to act on them.
And not just to fix the problems in the Eurozone.
For just as in any emergency you should plan for the aftermath as well as dealing with the present crisis so too in the midst of the present challenges we should plan for the future, and what the world will look like when the difficulties in the Eurozone have been overcome.
The biggest danger to the European Union comes not from those who advocate change, but from those who denounce new thinking as heresy.
In its long history Europe has experience of heretics who turned out to have a point.
And my point is this.
More of the same will not secure a long-term future for the Eurozone.
More of the same will not see the European Union keeping pace with the new powerhouse economies.
More of the same will not bring the European Union any closer to its citizens.
More of the same will just produce more of the same – less competitiveness, less growth, fewer jobs.
And that will make our countries weaker not stronger.
That is why we need fundamental, far-reaching change.
So let me set out my vision for a new European Union, fit for the 21st Century.
It is built on five principles.
The first: competitiveness.
At the core of the European Union must be, as it is now, the single market.
Britain is at the heart of that Single Market, and must remain so.
But when the Single Market remains incomplete in services, energy and digital – the very sectors that are the engines of a modern economy - it is only half the success it could be.
It is nonsense that people shopping online in some parts of Europe are unable to access the best deals because of where they live.
I want completing the single market to be our driving mission.
I want us to be at the forefront of transformative trade deals with the US, Japan and India as part of the drive towards global free trade.
And I want us to be pushing to exempt Europe's smallest entrepreneurial companies from more EU Directives.
These should be the tasks that get European officials up in the morning – and keep them working late into the night.
And so we urgently need to address the sclerotic, ineffective decision making that is holding us back.
That means creating a leaner, less bureaucratic Union, relentlessly focused on helping its member countries to compete.
In a global race, can we really justify the huge number of expensive peripheral European institutions? Can we justify a Commission that gets ever larger? Can we carry on with an organisation that has a multi-billion pound budget but not enough focus on controlling spending and shutting down programmes that haven’t worked? And I would ask: when the competitiveness of the Single Market is so important, why is there an environment council, a transport council, an education council but not a single market council? The second principle should be flexibility.
We need a structure that can accommodate the diversity of its members – North, South, East, West, large, small, old and new.
Some of whom are contemplating much closer economic and political integration.
And many others, including Britain, who would never embrace that goal.
I accept, of course, that for the single market to function we need a common set of rules and a way of enforcing them.
But we also need to be able to respond quickly to the latest developments and trends.
Competitiveness demands flexibility, choice and openness - or Europe will fetch up in a no-man’s land between the rising economies of Asia and market-driven North America.
The EU must be able to act with the speed and flexibility of a network, not the cumbersome rigidity of a bloc.
We must not be weighed down by an insistence on a one size fits all approach which implies that all countries want the same level of integration.
The fact is that they don’t and we shouldn’t assert that they do.
Some will claim that this offends a central tenet of the EU’s founding philosophy.
I say it merely reflects the reality of the European Union today.
17 members are part of the Eurozone.
10 are not.
26 European countries are members of Schengen – including four outside the European Union – Switzerland, Norway, Liechtenstein and Iceland.
2 EU countries – Britain and Ireland – have retained their border controls.
Some members, like Britain and France, are ready, willing and able to take action in Libya or Mali.
Others are uncomfortable with the use of military force.
Let’s welcome that diversity, instead of trying to snuff it out.
Let’s stop all this talk of two-speed Europe, of fast lanes and slow lanes, of countries missing trains and buses, and consign the whole weary caravan of metaphors to a permanent siding.
Instead, let’s start from this proposition: we are a family of democratic nations, all members of one European Union, whose essential foundation is the single market rather than the single currency.
Those of us outside the euro recognise that those in it are likely to need to make some big institutional changes.
By the same token, the members of the Eurozone should accept that we, and indeed all Member States, will have changes that we need to safeguard our interests and strengthen democratic legitimacy.
And we should be able to make these changes too.
Some say this will unravel the principle of the EU – and that you can’t pick and choose on the basis of what your nation needs.
But far from unravelling the EU, this will in fact bind its Members more closely because such flexible, willing cooperation is a much stronger glue than compulsion from the centre.
Let me make a further heretical proposition.
The European Treaty commits the Member States to “lay the foundations of an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe”.
This has been consistently interpreted as applying not to the peoples but rather to the states and institutions compounded by a European Court of Justice that has consistently supported greater centralisation.
We understand and respect the right of others to maintain their commitment to this goal.
But for Britain – and perhaps for others - it is not the objective.
And we would be much more comfortable if the Treaty specifically said so freeing those who want to go further, faster, to do so, without being held back by the others.
So to those who say we have no vision for Europe.
I say we have.
We believe in a flexible union of free member states who share treaties and institutions and pursue together the ideal of co-operation.
To represent and promote the values of European civilisation in the world.
To advance our shared interests by using our collective power to open markets.
And to build a strong economic base across the whole of Europe.
And we believe in our nations working together to protect the security and diversity of our energy supplies.
To tackle climate change and global poverty.
To work together against terrorism and organised crime.
And to continue to welcome new countries into the EU.
This vision of flexibility and co-operation is not the same as those who want to build an ever closer political union – but it is just as valid.
My third principle is that power must be able to flow back to Member States, not just away from them.
This was promised by European Leaders at Laeken a decade ago.
It was put in the Treaty.
But the promise has never really been fulfilled.
We need to implement this principle properly.
So let us use this moment, as the Dutch Prime Minister has recently suggested, to examine thoroughly what the EU as a whole should do and should stop doing.
In Britain we have already launched our balance of competences review – to give us an informed and objective analysis of where the EU helps and where it hampers.
Let us not be misled by the fallacy that a deep and workable single market requires everything to be harmonised, to hanker after some unattainable and infinitely level playing field.
Countries are different.
They make different choices.
We cannot harmonise everything.
For example, it is neither right nor necessary to claim that the integrity of the single market, or full membership of the European Union requires the working hours of British hospital doctors to be set in Brussels irrespective of the views of British parliamentarians and practitioners.
In the same way we need to examine whether the balance is right in so many areas where the European Union has legislated including on the environment, social affairs and crime.
Nothing should be off the table.
My fourth principle is democratic accountability: we need to have a bigger and more significant role for national parliaments.
There is not, in my view, a single European demos.
It is national parliaments, which are, and will remain, the true source of real democratic legitimacy and accountability in the EU.
It is to the Bundestag that Angela Merkel has to answer.
It is through the Greek Parliament that Antonis Samaras has to pass his Government’s austerity measures.
It is to the British Parliament that I must account on the EU budget negotiations, or on the safeguarding of our place in the single market.
Those are the Parliaments which instil proper respect – even fear - into national leaders.
We need to recognise that in the way the EU does business.
My fifth principle is fairness: whatever new arrangements are enacted for the Eurozone, they must work fairly for those inside it and out.
That will be of particular importance to Britain.
As I have said, we will not join the single currency.
But there is no overwhelming economic reason why the single currency and the single market should share the same boundary, any more than the single market and Schengen.
Our participation in the single market, and our ability to help set its rules is the principal reason for our membership of the EU.
So it is a vital interest for us to protect the integrity and fairness of the single market for all its members.
And that is why Britain has been so concerned to promote and defend the single market as the Eurozone crisis rewrites the rules on fiscal coordination and banking union.
These five principles provide what, I believe, is the right approach for the European Union.
So now let me turn to what this means for Britain.
Today, public disillusionment with the EU is at an all time high.
There are several reasons for this.
People feel that the EU is heading in a direction that they never signed up to.
They resent the interference in our national life by what they see as unnecessary rules and regulation.
And they wonder what the point of it all is.
Put simply, many ask “why can’t we just have what we voted to join – a common market?” They are angered by some legal judgements made in Europe that impact on life in Britain.
Some of this antipathy about Europe in general really relates of course to the European Court of Human Rights, rather than the EU.
And Britain is leading European efforts to address this.
There is, indeed, much more that needs to be done on this front.
But people also feel that the EU is now heading for a level of political integration that is far outside Britain’s comfort zone.
They see Treaty after Treaty changing the balance between Member States and the EU.
And note they were never given a say.
They’ve had referendums promised - but not delivered.
They see what has happened to the Euro.
And they note that many of our political and business leaders urged Britain to join at the time.
And they haven’t noticed many expressions of contrition.
And they look at the steps the Eurozone is taking and wonder what deeper integration for the Eurozone will mean for a country which is not going to join the Euro.
The result is that democratic consent for the EU in Britain is now wafer thin.
Some people say that to point this out is irresponsible, creates uncertainty for business and puts a question mark over Britain’s place in the European Union.
But the question mark is already there and ignoring it won’t make it go away.
In fact, quite the reverse.
Those who refuse to contemplate consulting the British people, would in my view make more likely our eventual exit.
Simply asking the British people to carry on accepting a European settlement over which they have had little choice is a path to ensuring that when the question is finally put – and at some stage it will have to be – it is much more likely that the British people will reject the EU.
That is why I am in favour of a referendum.
I believe in confronting this issue – shaping it, leading the debate.
Not simply hoping a difficult situation will go away.
Some argue that the solution is therefore to hold a straight in-out referendum now.
I understand the impatience of wanting to make that choice immediately.
But I don’t believe that to make a decision at this moment is the right way forward, either for Britain or for Europe as a whole.
A vote today between the status quo and leaving would be an entirely false choice.
Now - while the EU is in flux, and when we don’t know what the future holds and what sort of EU will emerge from this crisis is not the right time to make such a momentous decision about the future of our country.
It is wrong to ask people whether to stay or go before we have had a chance to put the relationship right.
How can we sensibly answer the question ‘in or out’ without being able to answer the most basic question: ‘what is it exactly that we are choosing to be in or out of?’ The European Union that emerges from the Eurozone crisis is going to be a very different body.
It will be transformed perhaps beyond recognition by the measures needed to save the Eurozone.
We need to allow some time for that to happen – and help to shape the future of the European Union, so that when the choice comes it will be a real one.
A real choice between leaving or being part of a new settlement in which Britain shapes and respects the rules of the single market but is protected by fair safeguards, and free of the spurious regulation which damages Europe’s competitiveness.
A choice between leaving or being part of a new settlement in which Britain is at the forefront of collective action on issues like foreign policy and trade and where we leave the door firmly open to new members.
A new settlement subject to the democratic legitimacy and accountability of national parliaments where Member States combine in flexible cooperation, respecting national differences not always trying to eliminate them and in which we have proved that some powers can in fact be returned to Member States.
In other words, a settlement which would be entirely in keeping with the mission for an updated European Union I have described today.
More flexible, more adaptable, more open - fit for the challenges of the modern age.
And to those who say a new settlement can’t be negotiated, I would say listen to the views of other parties in other European countries arguing for powers to flow back to European states.
And look too at what we have achieved already.
Ending Britain’s obligation to bail-out Eurozone members.
Keeping Britain out of the fiscal compact.
Launching a process to return some existing justice and home affairs powers.
Securing protections on Banking Union.
And reforming fisheries policy.
So we are starting to shape the reforms we need now.
Some will not require Treaty change.
But I agree too with what President Barroso and others have said.
At some stage in the next few years the EU will need to agree on Treaty change to make the changes needed for the long term future of the Euro and to entrench the diverse, competitive, democratically accountable Europe that we seek.
I believe the best way to do this will be in a new Treaty so I add my voice to those who are already calling for this.
My strong preference is to enact these changes for the entire EU, not just for Britain.
But if there is no appetite for a new Treaty for us all then of course Britain should be ready to address the changes we need in a negotiation with our European partners.
The next Conservative Manifesto in 2015 will ask for a mandate from the British people for a Conservative Government to negotiate a new settlement with our European partners in the next Parliament.
It will be a relationship with the Single Market at its heart.
And when we have negotiated that new settlement, we will give the British people a referendum with a very simple in or out choice.
To stay in the EU on these new terms; or come out altogether.
It will be an in-out referendum.
Legislation will be drafted before the next election.
And if a Conservative Government is elected we will introduce the enabling legislation immediately and pass it by the end of that year.
And we will complete this negotiation and hold this referendum within the first half of the next parliament.
It is time for the British people to have their say.
It is time to settle this European question in British politics.
I say to the British people: this will be your decision.
And when that choice comes, you will have an important choice to make about our country’s destiny.
I understand the appeal of going it alone, of charting our own course.
But it will be a decision we will have to take with cool heads.
Proponents of both sides of the argument will need to avoid exaggerating their claims.
Of course Britain could make her own way in the world, outside the EU, if we chose to do so.
So could any other Member State.
But the question we will have to ask ourselves is this: is that the very best future for our country? We will have to weigh carefully where our true national interest lies.
Alone, we would be free to take our own decisions, just as we would be freed of our solemn obligation to defend our allies if we left NATO.
But we don’t leave NATO because it is in our national interest to stay and benefit from its collective defence guarantee.
We have more power and influence – whether implementing sanctions against Iran or Syria, or promoting democracy in Burma – if we can act together.
If we leave the EU, we cannot of course leave Europe.
It will remain for many years our biggest market, and forever our geographical neighbourhood.
We are tied by a complex web of legal commitments.
Hundreds of thousands of British people now take for granted their right to work, live or retire in any other EU country.
Even if we pulled out completely, decisions made in the EU would continue to have a profound effect on our country.
But we would have lost all our remaining vetoes and our voice in those decisions.
We would need to weigh up very carefully the consequences of no longer being inside the EU and its single market, as a full member.
Continued access to the Single Market is vital for British businesses and British jobs.
Since 2004, Britain has been the destination for one in five of all inward investments into Europe.
And being part of the Single Market has been key to that success.
There will be plenty of time to test all the arguments thoroughly, in favour and against the arrangement we negotiate.
But let me just deal with one point we hear a lot about.
There are some who suggest we could turn ourselves into Norway or Switzerland – with access to the single market but outside the EU.
But would that really be in our best interests? I admire those countries and they are friends of ours – but they are very different from us.
Norway sits on the biggest energy reserves in Europe, and has a sovereign wealth fund of over 500 billion euros.
And while Norway is part of the single market – and pays for the principle - it has no say at all in setting its rules: it just has to implement its directives.
The Swiss have to negotiate access to the Single Market sector by sector.
Accepting EU rules – over which they have no say – or else not getting full access to the Single Market, including in key sectors like financial services.
The fact is that if you join an organisation like the European Union, there are rules.
You will not always get what you want.
But that does not mean we should leave - not if the benefits of staying and working together are greater.
We would have to think carefully too about the impact on our influence at the top table of international affairs.
There is no doubt that we are more powerful in Washington, in Beijing, in Delhi because we are a powerful player in the European Union.
That matters for British jobs and British security.
It matters to our ability to get things done in the world.
It matters to the United States and other friends around the world, which is why many tell us very clearly that they want Britain to remain in the EU.
We should think very carefully before giving that position up.
If we left the European Union, it would be a one-way ticket, not a return.
So we will have time for a proper, reasoned debate.
At the end of that debate you, the British people, will decide.
And I say to our European partners, frustrated as some of them no doubt are by Britain’s attitude: work with us on this.
Consider the extraordinary steps which the Eurozone members are taking to keep the Euro together, steps which a year ago would have seemed impossible.
It does not seem to me that the steps which would be needed to make Britain - and others – more comfortable in their relationship in the European Union are inherently so outlandish or unreasonable.
And just as I believe that Britain should want to remain in the EU so the EU should want us to stay.
For an EU without Britain, without one of Europe’s strongest powers, a country which in many ways invented the single market, and which brings real heft to Europe’s influence on the world stage which plays by the rules and which is a force for liberal economic reform would be a very different kind of European Union.
And it is hard to argue that the EU would not be greatly diminished by Britain’s departure.
Let me finish today by saying this.
I have no illusions about the scale of the task ahead.
I know there will be those who say the vision I have outlined will be impossible to achieve.
That there is no way our partners will co-operate.
That the British people have set themselves on a path to inevitable exit.
And that if we aren’t comfortable being in the EU after 40 years, we never will be.
But I refuse to take such a defeatist attitude – either for Britain or for Europe.
Because with courage and conviction I believe we can deliver a more flexible, adaptable and open European Union in which the interests and ambitions of all its members can be met.
With courage and conviction I believe we can achieve a new settlement in which Britain can be comfortable and all our countries can thrive.
And when the referendum comes let me say now that if we can negotiate such an arrangement, I will campaign for it with all my heart and soul.
Because I believe something very deeply.
That Britain’s national interest is best served in a flexible, adaptable and open European Union and that such a European Union is best with Britain in it.
Over the coming weeks, months and years, I will not rest until this debate is won.
For the future of my country.
For the success of the European Union.
And for the prosperity of our peoples for generations to come.